잡지명	別乾坤 제28호
발행일	1930년 05월 01일
기사제목	무엇이 그들로 하야곰 獨身生活을 하게 하는가?, 고독한 사람들의 告白 (What Makes Them Live a Single Life?, Confessions of Lonely People)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

What Makes Them Live a Single Life?, Confessions of Lonely People
The Price of Unjustified Guilt
X Y Z

1. I got married long before I turned twenty. Since I got married, I can be classified as a married man.
However, for the past 20 years since I got married, I haven't experienced any marital life, not even the slightest bit.
Since I don't have marital life, I'm a homeless single person. - That is, a bachelor who hasn't lost his wife, a married bachelor.
It's a contradictory and strange contradiction.
It's already been over 20 years, so it's like old things are medicine.
Putting a mortarboard on a young child wearing a school uniform, dressing him in official robes (just like a Chinese person playing with a monkey), putting him on a horse, and sending that child to a bride who is bigger than the horse he rode - that puppet act - no - the monkey act was done by me, the one who is talking now.
If you compare it to the feeling of feeding a male chick and buying a female chicken at the market and putting them together, would it be about four degrees of kinship?
However, even in a marriage like this, it's not that there is no marital affection between the two people at all. There's no need to even mention that the affection is more intense than in a love marriage.
But what if, unfortunately, eternal loneliness sets in and they are forever estranged? ... ... <38>
Get a divorce.
What if the situation makes it impossible to get a divorce?
Then, inevitably, one becomes a bachelor who hasn't lost his wife like me... a married bachelor.
Indeed, the more I think about it, the more unfair it seems.
If I try to join the married people, they scorn me because I don't have a wife, and if I try to join the bachelors, they drive me out because I'm a married man.
No matter where I look, there's no place to go. What a pitiful situation.
If I had done something wrong and was suffering this incredible thing, I wouldn't complain, but I haven't done anything wrong, not even a hair's breadth!
So, after I came to my senses, I tried to get a divorce - I tried all sorts of ingenious tricks, but in the end, I failed.
After failing, I tried to repent endlessly. But I failed again.
However, when a person's "thoughts" change, the way they see things also changes.
And so, I came to see my "marriage" in this way.
Currently, that woman (the woman from the house I led like a monkey) and I are complete strangers (他人).
In the past, I had no affection for that woman, and I don't have any now. Furthermore, not to mention living together, I don't live in my parents' house or in her family's house, and just as I have given up on her, she has also given up on me and thinks of me as a stranger forever.
So, in substance, we are 12 minutes divorced.
But one problem is the family register (民籍), but if I interpret this in my own way, there's no problem at all.
The family register (民籍) is based on the Family Registration Law (民籍法), and the Family Registration Law (民籍法) is part of the current law (現行法律).
The current law (現行法律) comes from the current social system (現社會制度).
But I completely deny (XX) this XXXXX on my XX.
Therefore, I XX the XXXX and also XX the XXX.
Therefore, the fact that my family register (民籍) is written in the family register book (戶籍簿) of OO 면 (面) OO 군 (郡), OO 도 (道) is also considered a piece of XX, and the fact that a woman's name is written next to my family register (民籍) is also a piece of XX.
By making such a firm decision as above, I was able to escape from the hell of being married.
But even with such airtight theory, there is one hardship that cannot be overcome. <39>
First, it is the woman's pitiful situation. No matter how much I distance myself from her because there is no marital affection, I can't help but feel sorry for her situation because I am also a human being with a little bit of compassion.
As a man, I can reason as I said above, and I don't consider that problem a big problem in my life, but she has already become a spinster in the world, so I can't help but feel sorry for her when I think about it.
Ah! What is human emotion!
If you hate and dislike someone, you should just hate and dislike them. Why feel sorry for them? And if you feel sorry for them, you should be kind to them, but I still hate and dislike her, so there is probably nothing in the world as messed up as a human being.
Due to the above circumstances, I am currently living a single life.
This is one of the reasons.

2. There is a saying that even old iron makes a sound (땡그랑).
I also made a sound (땡그랑) and tried dating, and I had some profit.
I have done it three times.
Since I have dated three times, it might be easy to think that I am a guy who has taken away other people's daughters, but I have not committed any sin(?) in all three times. Of course, I don't necessarily see the absence of physical relationships as clean, nor do I necessarily see the presence of carnal relationships as dirty or sinful, but the fact is that I have looked at all three favorably.
If I make another ugly excuse that no one will believe, I have never gone to a brothel in my 30 years, and I have only tried keeping a kisaeng (긔생) for a few months.
That being said, I abandoned the first woman among the three first.
It was not because my passion had cooled, but because I had heard rumors about her.
Even now, if we loved each other, I would have been indifferent to it, but at that time, I felt very uncomfortable and disgusted.
So, although I abandoned her, I couldn't forget her for a long time and had a lot of worries.
I was so sad and lonely that I even tried to commit suicide. - Because I was a suicide admirer at that time. The third one was a crush.
Since this was not done on a whim, it was very serious, and therefore, the impact was very great. <40>
Of course, I didn't drink, cry, or laugh foolishly because I had lost my love like before (no one would believe it if a guy like me shed tears over a woman!).
Instead, because I couldn't vent the resentment inside with alcohol or tears, I almost got internal bruises.
I learned a lot from these three loves.
First, I realized that I am not fit to receive a woman's love - neither in terms of looks nor personality.
Of the three women mentioned above, I was the one who first made advances to the first two women, so it was only with great difficulty that I managed to somehow achieve love, and the third woman, I was the only one who liked her, but she didn't even look at me out of the corner of her eye, so I thoroughly realized that I am not a person to appear in the world of love.
Second, I realized that once I become attached to a woman, my infatuation is too great.
Once I have a heartbreak, it lasts for three years, and moreover, I still can't forget the very last one, even though that woman is now married and living happily with her husband, so if I am like this until I die, I won't be able to sleep peacefully.
Therefore, the reason is that there is no one to follow me and ask me to love them, and even if there were, if I were to love them and get married and live together, and then they were to abandon me, it would be a disgrace, and it would be a lot of trouble to forget about it for a while, so it is better to live as a single person. This is the second reason.

3. The third reason is that no matter what, family life is more of a hindrance to work than single life.
Work? What kind of work?
Work is nothing special. ... Well ... shh - everyone will hear. ...
Because it has become like this, I don't want to get married, and women are not interested in me. It is truly a situation where the owner doesn't have soy sauce (醬), but the guest doesn't like the soup. We are not sorry for each other.
If I say this, the listener might say,
"Oh, you're so ugly that women don't follow you, and because you've been married once, you can't get married again, so you make up a third reason and hold on."
But such an interpretation is too harsh an attack on a pitiful guy like me.
If I were to use demonic tricks, I could probably charm about a group of new women these days. It's not like I can't get married.
But I don't want to do that. It's not because I'm some moral gentleman, but what's the fun in getting a woman by doing such things? <41>
Besides, I already have a job in hand, and even if I devote myself to that, my body won't be enough, so when would I have time to pursue personal pleasure and have idle dreams?
There is a lot to say about the third reason, but my pen is choked and I can't write it all.
Anyway, I have come to live a single life and I intend to do so.
I have already lived almost half my life as a single person. Even if I count the remaining years of my youth until I am fifty, there are only a little less than twenty years left.
To be sure, because I am human, I also have a desperate desire for the inevitable things in life.
But that is still just a matter of "one person" without a name.
Also, that is a problem for the second stage. It's a problem that will be solved in our grandchildren's time.
Is there anyone who is in the same situation as me, unable to go to the lady's seat and chased out of the bachelor's group, not knowing where to go and standing blankly? Moreover, if there is anyone who is living lonely because there is no one to love, don't just drink or go to cafes, but come to me and let's form a kye (契 - mutual aid society). The name of the kye (契) is
"The kye (契) of married bachelors and bachelors who have not lost their wives."
Lastly. ... If there is a woman who feels sorry for a guy like me and asks for compassionate love, I especially announce it under the name of marriage.

Thirty Years of an Old Maid
P·Y·S

If a woman is still unmarried at the age of twenty-seven, people in Korea will treat her as if she were some kind of terrible disabled person, calling her an old miss (old maid) in modern terms, with seven parts ridicule and three parts leftover pity. "She must be so ugly that no one wants to take her even at that age! She must have some defect that prevents her from getting married... These days, girls are so arrogant that they don't get married. Isn't this a terrible thing? They think they're so precious that they don't even think of ordinary people as being worth as much as the dirt on their toes. It would be nice if there was a young gentleman who was rich, handsome, smart, and had studied abroad, but where is such a person easy to find? In our Korea..." This is the most irresponsible criticism of old misses in general. No, it's ridicule and insincere sighs. On the one hand, there are also those who recklessly lavish self-affirming sympathy and try to use it as a kind of bait.
"It must be a bit lonely to live alone at that age... Men can adapt in some ways, but women can't... How severe must her sexual <42> anxieties be. I'll just close my eyes and have an affair with her, isn't that also an act of charity!"
It seems that there are many libertines and lechers who disturb the quiet and clean bedside of an old maid and try to awaken their boredom of carnal desire with a playful mood, as if a full person were holding food that they were tired of eating and treating a very hungry person as if they would rush to swallow it in one bite if they just gave it to them.
To this extent, old maids in Korea are in a very unhappy environment, undergoing various trials, like a rabbit that has jumped into a thorn bush. Therefore, rather than a kind of sense of superiority that single people have, a gloomy sorrow is reflected on their faces, which has become like a weakness for our Korean old misses. Among Western women, it is rather common to see old maids in their thirties and forties, and there are even old maids in their seventies and eighties, who receive considerable treatment and reverence from general society and freely express their self-esteem as misses. Whenever I hear this, it seems that our women have too much timidity and weakness, and are too static (although they have received such education from the beginning), and the weaknesses and wounds they have obtained while living in hiding, barely breathing under the power of men, are vividly revealed. Then why did I choose this disadvantageous single life of an old maid? Especially since only our female single people are receiving special treatment like French nuns, I cannot help but say a word.
And if there are any of you who are genuinely curious, I will honestly tell you the reason why I myself do not marry, even if it is not a general reason.
I am a so-called overage virgin of twenty-seven, but it is not a boast to say that my face is not so ugly, and I believe that I have at least learned the knowledge of a middle school level. And my married friends have mediated several times, saying that there is a good person, and my elders at home have made such a fuss, calling me a house-ruining girl, that I could not bear it and hid in my sister's house for ten days, so it is not that I have not been able to marry because there is no one to find me, is it? If I look back at the origin of the reasons why I have come to live a single life today and the critical view (poor as it may be) I have of married life or men, I cannot help but relive the old wounds. Eight years ago, when I was in the third grade of a certain higher girls' school, I met for the first time what I thought was a boyfriend, a student at a certain specialized school who was said to be the maternal cousin of my friend who was staying in the same boarding house. (There is no need to say his name, and I don't even want to call it out of my mouth) Before long, we fell in love with each other. And so, we followed the same path of love as others.
There was nothing I wouldn't give him. No matter how much this society respects and monitors virginity, it was worth nothing in front of my lover.
However, the flame of love mixed with carnal desire burned the pure and quiet heart of the virgin for a year, and then left only cold ashes and died.
What good would it do to count the tears and sighs I received from my lover?
"Show me proof that you love me. Proof that I can believe..."
When I heard his excited whispers, I was so drunk that I didn't have time to think any further, and I completely dedicated to him the virginity that I had cherished in my heart for nineteen years. And so, after a year had passed like a dream, didn't I go to the secret wedding hall where he, who had a wife, was secretly getting married, to find anger and tears? I certainly didn't go to find him. I felt endlessly sorry for his bride, who seemed excited by emotion and happiness, and I wanted to cry for her instead. However, because the amount of anger and tears was so great, my wound healed quickly in reaction. Of course, as a price, my view of men changed completely. I came to wear a fox mask to men who pretended to be gentle and smart, and stepped back from them. From that time on, love seemed to be a beautiful prank that is easy to get caught up in during adolescence, and marriage seemed to be nothing more than a foolish act of a young sheep that used to run freely in the pasture, putting a yoke on its head, tying a rope, being dragged around at the will of the shepherd, milking its milk, and nodding its head and promising to obey, even if it is tired and hard. Look, once our women get married, they entrust their whole lives to the fate of their husbands and barely maintain their lives, clinging to their husbands' shoulders with a weak existence like shadows, don't they? Even if cooking, washing, and giving birth to babies are tiring and laborious, they cannot even be considered as production value, and the fact is that Korean women are suffering harsh abuse under the despotism and oppression of their husbands, who hold the economic power. I knew the foolishness of being captivated by a one-sided concept of chastity and pursuing a man with whom I had once had an affair to the end, regardless of the circumstances. Why would I ruin my life by insisting on the virginity I had lost at one time? And isn't chastity ultimately a morality that is only forced on us to give a man a monopolistic sense of satisfaction? Where is there a man who keeps his chastity for his marriage partner, and how many men have the courage to reject a woman who has lost her virginity once or twice? I have seen many men who don't ask about their past lives and rush in if they have some money or a handsome face. And in Korea, if you try to select a marriage partner directly or indirectly with all your efforts, the counterpart is already married. And so, it is a miserable phenomenon that it is difficult to find a man who suits your taste unless you become a concubine, which is a vulgar name from the start. Moreover, in Korean society, where male-female relationships are extremely restricted. In this way, I felt disappointed in all men. The small revenge I felt against the guy who trampled on me eventually changed the problem into anger, passion, and reflection as a member of women who are suffering humiliation from all men, and I came to the decision to live without a man. To do this, I had to have the power and means to be economically independent, so I used various means to get my father and brothers' permission to finish pharmacy school, and now I have obtained a pharmacist's license and am working for a monthly salary at a certain hospital in the city. I seem to be obtaining new truths and accumulating noble cultivation in a single life where I suppress the desires of life that arise from time to time with academics and hobbies, away from the complicated family life and the marital life that is prone to breakdown, and live safely and peacefully. But I will say at the end that my life is by no means a private monastery and put down this pen. <33>
<38-44>

**Named Entities**

某高等女學校	Mo higher girls' school
某專門學校學生	Mo professional school student
OO道	OO-do
OO郡	OO-kun
OO面	OO-myŏn
朝鮮	Chosŏn
佛蘭西	P'ŭransa



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제28호
발행일	1930년 05월 01일
기사제목	무엇이 그들로 하야곰 獨身生活을 하게 하는가?, 고독한 사람들의 告白
기사형태	문예기타

무엇이 그들로 하야곰 獨身生活을 하게 하는가?, 고독한 사람들의 告白
억울한 罪의 代償
X Y Z

1. 스무살도 되기 훨신 前에 장가를 들엇다. 장가를 들엇스닛가 部類를 가린다면 기혼남자의 축에 끼일 수가 잇다.
그러나 나는 장가를 든지 于今 20여년에 부부생활이라고는 『ᄇ』人字도 하여보지 못하엿다.
夫婦生活을 하지 아니하니 갈데 업는 獨身者라. -즉 喪妻를 하지 아니한 홀애비요 장가를 들은 총각이다.
矛盾하고는 얄구즌 矛盾이다.
발서 20여년이닛가 그것도 녯이 약이다.
學帽를 쓰고 校服을 입은 어린애를 살살 꾀여다가 紗帽를 씨우고 官服을 입혀(맛치 中國 사람이 원숭이를 놀니듯이) 말을 태워서 그 애가 타고간 말보담도 큰 색시한테로 장가를 보내게 하는 그 人形 노릇-아니-원숭이 노릇을 한 것이 지금 이약이를 하는 나다.
숫병아리 한마리를 멕이면서 장에 가서 암닭 한마리를 사다가 자웅을 껴놋는 心事와 그 類를 따진다면 四寸빨쯤 될가?
何如間 이러케 들은 장가라도 그 兩人間에 夫婦의 情이 전부가 다 아니 생기는 것은 아니다. 戀愛結婚以上으로 情이 교칠가흔 것은 두말한 것도 업는 것이다.
그러나 불행히 永永 공방이 들어서 永永 사이가 토라진다면? ... ...＜38＞
이혼을 하지.
이혼도 못하게 形便이 되엿스면?
그러면 할 수 업시 나가흔 이러한 喪妻아니한 홀애비 ... ... 장가든 총각이 되고마는 것이다.
과연 생각하면 생각할수록 억울한 노름이다.
旣婚者통에 끼이랴고하면 마누라가 업다고 괄대를 하고 총각便으로 끼이랴고 하면 장가든 놈이라고 모라내인다.
四方을 돌너보아야 갈 곳이라고는 업다. 딱한 身勢다.
그것도 내가 무어나 잘못을 하고 이런 긔가맥힌 일을 당한다면 몰으거니와 내가 원 털끗만큼이라도 잘못이 잇서야지!
그래 좀 철이 난뒤에는 이혼을 하랴고-하랴고 별별 神出鬼沒한 꾀를 다 부려 보앗스나 結局은 실패를 하고 말엇다.
실패를 하고는 回心을 하랴고 무한한 애를 써보앗다. 그러나 역시 실패를 하고 말엇다.
그러나 사람이 『생각』이 밧귀면 사물을 보는 눈도 달러진다.
그리하야 나는 나의 『結婚하엿다』는 사실을 이러케 보게 되엿다.
現在 그 女子(내가 원숭이 숭내를 내며 글녀가든 그 집의 그 女子)와 나와는 새빨간 남(他人)이다.
과거에 잇서서 내가 그 女子에게 아모러한 情이 업섯고 현재에도 그러하며 더구나 同居는 姑捨하고 우리 부모의 집에도 잇지 안코 親家에 가서 살고 잇고 또 내가 그 여자를 斷念한 것처럼 그 여자도 나를 斷念하고 永永 남(他人)이니라고 생각하고 잇다.
그러닛가 內容에 잇서서는 12분으로 이혼이 된세음이다.
그러나 한가지 문제는 民籍인데 이것도 내 流로 解釋하면 아모 일도 업다.
民籍이라는 것은 民籍法에 依한 것이오. 民籍法은 現行 法律의 일부분이다.
現行法律은 現社會制度에서 울어나온 것이다.
그런데 나는 나의 XX上 이 XXXXX를 全的으로 XX한다.
따러서 XXXX을 XX하며 또한 XXX도 XX한다.
그럼으로 OOO道 OO郡 OO面의 戶籍簿에 나의 民籍이 쓰여 잇는 것도 한조각의 XX으로 녁이며 또한 나의 民籍엽헤 웬 여자의 姓名三字가 쓰여잇는 것도 한조각의 XX이다.
이상과 가흔 斷案을 내림으로써 나는 旣婚이라는 地獄속에서 버서나게 되엿다.
그러나 이와가흔 물샐틈업는 理論으로도 能히 엇지할＜39＞ 수 업는 한가지 괴로움이 잇다.
첫재는 그 여자의 가엽슨 身勢다. 내가 아모리 夫婦의 정이 업슴으로 그를 멀니하기는 한다지만 불행히 나도 사람축에 든다고 조고만한 人情이 잇기 때문에 그 여자의 身勢를 생각하면 가슴이 압흐지 아니할 수가 업다.
나는 사내자식인 만큼 우에 말한 그러한 理論도 따지고 또 그 문제가흔 것으로는 일생의 큰 문제로 삼ㅅ지도 안치만 그 여자는 이미 세상에서 송자이 된터이니 생각하면 아니 가엽슬 수가 업다.
아! 사람의 감정이란 무엇인지!
실코 미우면 그저 실코 미울것이지 가여울 것은 무엇이며 또 가여우면 다정히 굴어야할 것인데 그래도 실코 미우니 세상에 사람이란 짐생가치 아무케나 되야 먹은 물건은 다시 업슬것이다.
以上과 가흔 事情으로 인하야 나는 현재 獨身生活을 하고 잇는 중이다.
이래서 原因의 하나.

2. 俗談에 새양鐵도 鐵이라고 『땡그랑』한다는 말이 잇다.
나도 『땡그랑』 하느라고 연애를 하여 본전이 잇다.
해도 제법 세 번이나 하여 보앗다.
연애를 세번이나 하엿다닛가 첩경듯기에 흥 남의 집 아가씨를 제법 바려준 놈이라고 녁이기 쉽겟지만 그 세번에 모다 아모런한 罪(?)는 犯치 아니하엿다. 물론 나는 肉體的 關係가 업는 것을 端的으로 깨끗하다고 보는 것도 아니요 또 肉情의 關係가 잇섯다고 端的으로 더럽다거나 罪라고 보는 것도 아니나 何如튼 그 셋을 다 곱게 두고 본 것만은 事實이다.
남이 信用치 아니할 못생긴 변명을 또한번 하면 나는 30이 넘도록 유곽에 가서 자본 일이 업고 긔생외입만 꼭 하나 멧달동안 해보앗다.
그것은 그러타고 그 셋중에 맨처음 여자는 내가 먼점 그를 바리엿다.
그것은 내가 熱이 식엇서 그리한 것이 아니라 그의 醜聞을 들어섯기 때문이다.
지금만 가태도 彼此에 사랑하는 터이면 그것쯤이야 무관심햇겟지만 그때 생각에는 그것도 퍽도 께림칙하고 구억이 낫섯다.
그래서 바리기는 햇지만 오랫동안 연연히 잇지 못하고 만흔 고민을 하엿다.
넘우도 안탁갑고 고적하여서 자살까지 하려고 하엿다.-그때만 하여도 自殺讚美者이 엿스닛깨. 세번개는 짝사랑을 하엿다.
이것은 뜬긔운으로 한 것이 아니엇든 만큼 매우 深刻하엿고 따러서 타격도 퍽 크게입엇다.＜40＞
물론 前가치 失戀을 하엿다고 술을 먹고 울고 헛우슴을 치고 하지는 아니하엿다(나가흔 녀석이 여자로해서 눈물을 흘녓다면 아모도 밋지 아니할걸!)
그代身 속에 들은 恨을 술로 눈물로 내품지 못하는 만큼 하마하엿드면 內腫이 들을ㅅ번 하엿다.
이 세번의 戀愛에서 나는 깁히 배운 것이 잇다.
첫재는 나라는 사람은 도대톄 여자의 사랑을 어들 재비가 못된다는 것이다.-생긴 것으로나 性格으로나-.
그것은 우에 말한 세 여자중에 먼저 두 여자를 모도 다 내가 먼점 모-순을 걸어가지고 겨우 어터케 어덧든 戀愛엇섯고 세번째 여자는 나혼자 조아서 거들대엿지 그는 나를 눈꼬리로도 거듭떠보지 아니한 것으로 보아 나는 戀愛界에 登場할 인물이 못된다는 것을 철뎌히 깨달엇다.
둘째는 나는 한번 한 여자에게 愛着을 두면 未鍊이 넘우 크다는 것을 깨달엇다.
한번 失戀을 하면 삼년씩이나 끌녀가고 더구나 맨마주막의 것은 그 여자가 지금 시집을 가서 오손도손 저이끼리 잘 살것만 아직도 잇지 못하고 잇스니 이 압흐로 늙어 죽도록 이지경이라면 편안히 잠을 못잘것이다.
이러하기 때문에 나를 보고 戀愛를 하자고 따를 對象이 업는 것과 설영 잇서서 戀愛를 하다가 결혼을 하여서 살다가 나를 바리고 가바리면 망신도 망신이려니와 한동안 그것을 이저 바리자면 말ㅅ성이 될터이니 그대로 獨身으로 지내는게 낫겟다는 것이다. 이것이 둘째 원인.

3. 셋재로는 家庭生活이 아무리 하여도 獨身生活보담은 일에 妨害가 된다는 것이다.
일?무슨 일이길네?
일이라는 것은 딴 것이 아니라. ... 저 ... 쉬- 누구나 들을나. ...
이러케 되고 보닛가 나는 결혼을 하기가 실코 女性側에서는 내에게 興味를 가지지 안코 그야말로 주인은 醬이 업는데 客은 국을 실타는 격으로 彼此에 섭섭지 안케 되엿다.
이러케 말을 하면 듯는 사람은
『흥 네가 못생겨서 여자가 따르지 안코 또 결혼을 한번 햇기 때문에 다지 장가는 못갈톄닛가 第三의 이유를 만들어가지고 버틘다.』고 할지도 모른다.
그러나 그러한 解釋은 나가치 불상한 놈에게 넘우 악착한 攻駁이다.
내가 만일 色魔式의 手段을 부린다 하면 요지음 새악씨 쯤은 한뭇 가량은 주물을 수가 업는 것도 아니다. 결혼도 할 수 업는 것도 아니다.
그러나 나는 그것은 하기가 실타. 무슨 道德君子이래서 그런 것이 아니라 그따위 짓을 하여서 여자를 손에 너은들＜41＞ 快할 것이 무엇이냐.
하물며 이미 손에 잡은 바 일ㅅ감이 잇고 그것에만 精進하랴도 몸이 자라지 못하겟거든 어느 결을에 個人의 享樂을 차저 한가한 꿈을 꾸고 잇스랴.
第三의 이유에 대하여는 만히 한말이 잇스나 붓이 컥컥 무엇엔지 맥히어 다 쓰지 못한다.
좌우간 나는 獨身生活을 하게 되엿고 하려고 한다.
이미 半生을 갓가히 獨身으로 지내왓다. 압흐로 젊은 時節이래야 오십까지 친다 하여도 二十年이 좀 不足되게 남어 잇슬 뿐이다.
하기야 나도 사람인以上 人生必然의 간절한 바람이 생기지 아니하는 것도 아니다.
그러나 그것은 역시 名色업는 『어느 한사람』의 일에 지나지 못한다.
또한 그것은 제2단의 문제이다. 우리의 孫子놈때나 解決될 문제다.
나와 가치 同夫人席에도 못가고 총각축에서 쫏기어나서 갈 바를 몰나 뻔ㅅ하고 섯는 同志는 업소. 더구나 사랑해주려는 사람도 업서서 외로히 지내는 同志가 잇거든 공연히 술이나 먹고 카페나 다니지 말고 내게로 와서 契나 하나 모듭시다. 契의 名稱은
『장가든 총각의 喪妻아니한 홀애비契』라고.
끄트로. ... 혹 나가흔 놈을 불상히 녁여서 同情戀愛를 請하시는 女性이 게실가버 특히 婚名으로 發表한다.

老處女 三十年史
P·Y·S

처녀가 나희 스물일곱이나 되도록 시집을 가지 안엇다면 新式문자로 올드미쓰라하야 무슨 끔직스런 不具者나 되는 듯이 7분의 嘲弄과 3분의 쓰다 남은 동정심을 가지고 대하는 사람이 우리 朝鮮에는 만흘 것이다. 『여북 못생겻기에 그 나희되도록 다려가는 사람이 업슬나고! 몸에 시집 못갈 무슨 탈이 잇는게지. ... 오새 게집애들이란 건방저서를 그래 시집을 안간다는구료. 이런 딱한 일을 봣소. 꼴에 안고 수비해서 여간 따위는 제 발고락새 튀눈만치도 안녁인단 말야. 돈만코 인물 잘나고 똑똑하고 서양유학이나 갓다온 청년신사가 맛츰 잇섯스면 조흐련만 어듸 그런 사람이 쉽소. 우리 조선에. ...』 이러한 것이 일반의 올드미쓰에 대한 가장 무책임한 批判이다. 아니 嘲弄이요 마음에 업는 嘆息이다. 그러는 一面에는 또한 주착업는 自己肯定的 同情心을 濫發하며 일종의 香餌로 이용하려드는 작자도 업지가 안타.
「혼자 지내기가 좀 뭘할가 그만한 나희에. ... 남자 가흐면 엇더케 변통도 잇지만 녀자들은 그릴 처지도 못되고. ... 성뎍＜42＞ 고민이 얼마나 심할고. 내눈 질끔 감고 련애나 해줄가 그것도 적선이 아닌가!」
마치 배부른 자가 먹다 지친 음식을 들고 몹시 굼주린 사람을 대한듯이 주기만 하면 왈칵 달겨들어 한입에 집어 삼키겟거니 하는 殘忍한 好奇心과 肉慾의 倦怠를 깨우랴는 遊興的 氣分을 가지고 老處女의 고요하고 깨끗한 벼게가를 어즈려 놋코 사드는 蕩者와 色狂들이 만흔 모양이다.
이만치 朝鮮의 老處女들은 가시덩굴에 뛰여든 톡기와도 가치 불행한 환경에서 각가지 試鍊을 밧고 잇는 터이다. 그럼으로 獨身者가 가지는일종의 優越感보담도 沈鬱한 哀愁의 빗이 얼골에 떠도는 것이 우리 朝鮮 올드미쓰들의 弱點가치 되고 말엇다. 西洋여자들 가운데는 삼사십세된 올드미쓰는 오히려 보통이요 칠팔십세의 올드미쓰까지 잇서 일반사회의 상당한 待遇와 崇仰을 바드며 미쓰의 自尊心을 거침업시 發揮하고 잇다는 말을 들을때마다 우리 여성들이 넘우나 수집고 柔弱한 氣質이 만코 靜的이여서 (종래로 그러한 교육을 바더왓지만) 일상 男性들의 勢力에 눌니어 숨도 크게 못쉬고 숨어서 사러 오는 가운데 어든 弱點과 傷處가 력력히 들어 나는 듯 십다. 그러면 웨 나는 이와가치 不利한 올드미쓰의 獨身生活을 擇하엿슬가 특히 우리 여자 獨身者만이 佛蘭西 신부 모양으로 敬面遠之的 特殊待遇를 밧고 잇는 이만치 나로써 한마듸 아니할 수가 업다.
그리고 혹 여러분 가운데는 진정한 의미에서 궁금히 생각하는 분도 업지안을가 하야 비록 일반적 이유는 되지 못한다 하드래도 내 自身의 결혼 아니하는 이유를 솔직하게 말하려 한다.
나는 스물일곱이란 소위 過年한 處女이지만 자랑이 아니라 얼골도 그리 밉지는 안은 편이요 中學程度의 學識만은 배와 알고 잇는 줄 밋는다. 그리고 시집간 동무들이 여러번 조흔 사람이 잇스니 시집을 가라고 중매도 든 일이 잇고 집아 어른들께서는 집안 망할년이라고 야단야단을 해서 복기다 못해 언니집에 가서 열흘이나 숨어지내면서 굿이 결혼을 拒絶해 온터이니 결코 찻는 사람이 업서 시집 못간 것은 아닌 게 아니냐. 내가 오늘날 獨身生活을 하게된 원인과 결혼생활이나 男性에 대한 批判眼(貧弱하나마)을 가지게 된 出發點을 돌아다 본다면 할수업시 녯날의 傷處를 다시 더듬지 안을 수 업다. 八年前 내가 某高等女學校 三年級때에 갓흔 下宿에 留宿하고 잇섯든 내동무의 외사촌 옵바된다는 某專門學校學生 하나를 남자친구라고는 처음으로 알게 되엿다. (그의 일홈은 굿하이 말할 필요도 업고 과시내 입으로 불으고 십지도 안타) 그리자 얼마를 못가서 우리는 서로 사랑하는 사이가 되엿다. 그리하야 우리도 남과 가흔 戀愛의 經路를 밟어왓섯다.
그에게 바친다면 무엇이고 앗가운 것이 업섯다. 아모리 이 사회도덕이 處女性을 尊重하고 監視한다 하여도 愛人의 압헤서는 한푼어치 가치도 업는 것이엿다.
그러나 肉情을 석근＜43＞ 愛戀의 불길은 純眞하고 고요하든 처녀의 가삼을 一年동안 恍惚히도 태워주고는 식은 재만을 남기고 살어저 바렷다.
애인에게서 바든 눈물과 한숨을 헤아려 본들 무슨 소용이 잇섯스랴.
『사랑한다는 증거를 보혀주시요. 내가 미들 수 잇는 증거를. ...』
그의 감격에 넘치어 속살김을 들을때 나는 무엇에 취한 듯이 더 생각해 볼 여유도 업시 십구년동안이나 내 가삼에 안고 곱게 직혀 오든 처녀를 온전히 그에게 밧첫섯다. 그리하야 1년이 꿈가치 지난 다음에 本妻가 잇는 그가 나몰내 장가드는 秘密結婚式場에 나는 憤恨과 눈물을 차즈려가지 안엇든가 결코 그를 차즈려고 간 것은 아니엿다. 나는 감격과 행복에 興奮된 듯이 보히는 그의 신부가 한업시 가여운 생각이 나서 오히려 그를 위해 울고 십헛다. 그러나 憤恨과 눈물의 量이 만헛느니 만치 反動的으로 내 傷處는 빨니 아무럿다. 그 代價로 男性에 대한 見解가 왼통 달너진 것은 물론이다. 順良하고 점잔하고 똑똑한 체 하는 사나희들에게는 더구나 狐狸의 마스크를 씨우고 뒤로 물너서게 되엿섯다. 그때부터 연애란 靑春期에 저즈리기 쉬운 아름다운 작란이요 결혼이란 牧場에서 자유롭게 뛰여놀든 어린 羊이 제목에다 굴네를 씨우고 밧줄을 매여서 牧者의 마음대로 끄을고 단이며 젓을 짜내고 털을 까거도 좃타고 고개를 긋덕이고 順從하기를 約束하는 어리빠진 짓이나 다름업시 생각이 되엿다. 보아라 우리 여성들은 한번 시집가면 모도가 남편의 운명에 제 일신을 갓다 맛기고 그림자와 가치 약한 존재를 가지고 남편의 억개에 매달여 간신히 그 命脈을 부치고 잇지 안느냐 밥을 짓고 빨내를 하고 애기를 낫코 하는 것이 아모리 고달푸고 勞役이 심하드래도 그런 것은 生産갑세도 가지 못하고 오즉 經濟的 實權을 쥐고 잇는 남편의 專制와 壓迫아래 모진 虐待를 밧고 잇는 것이 朝鮮 여성들이 아니엿든가. 나는 일편의 貞操觀念에 사로잡혀서 경우와 사정을 헤아리지 안코 한번 정을 통한 사나희를 어데까지든지 追求하는 어리석음을 알엇다. 한때 일허바린 貞操를 고집하야 엇지 자기의 일생을 그릇치리요. 그리고 貞操란 結局 한 사나희의 獨占的 滿足感을 주기 위하야 우리들에게만 강요된 도덕이 아니냐. 자기의 결혼상대자를 위하야 貞操를 직혀오는 사나희가 어데 잇스며 얼골이 입분 여자가 한두번 貞操를 일헛다고 물니칠 勇斷性을 가진 남자가 몃치나 되느냐. 돈이나 좀 잇고 얼골이나 뻰뻰한 여자라면 그 과거생활을 뭇지 안코 덤비는 남자를 허다히 보아왓다. 그리고 朝鮮에서는 直接間接으로 일껀 애를 써서 결혼의 相對者로 골나 놋코 보면 대가가 旣婚者다. 그리하야 일홈부터 상스러운 妾노릇을 하기 전에는 마음에 맛는 男便을 구하기 어려운 참담한 현상이다. 더구나 男女交際가 극히 자유롭지 못한 朝鮮社會에서리요. 이리하야 나는 모든 男性에게 失望을 늣기엿다. 나를 짓밟고＜44＞ 간 그년석에 대한 자그만한 복수심은 드듸여 모든 男性들에게 屈辱을 당하고 잇는 여성의 한 分子로써 가지게 되는 憤과 熱과 反省으로 문제를 밧구어서 남자 업시 살어보겟다는 결심을 엇게 되엿다. 그림함에는 첫재 經濟的으로 자립할만한 힘과 方策이 잇서야겟슴으로 나는 여러가지 수단을 다 써서 父兄의 承諾을 바다 藥學校를 맛치고 나서 이제 藥劑師의 免許證을 어더 市內 어느 病院에서 月給生活을 하고 잇다. 煩雜한 가정생활 파탄이 일기 쉬운 부부생활를 떠나 때로 일어나는 인생의 慾望을 學究와 취미로 抑壓하고 안존하고 평화롭게 살어가는 獨身生活에서 새로운 眞理를 엇고 高尙한 修養을 싸허가는 듯십다. 그러나 내 생활이 결코 私設 修道院이 아니라는 것만 끗흐로 말해두고 이 붓을 놋는다.＜33＞
＜38-44＞