잡지명 별건곤 제28호
발행일 1930년 05월 01일
기사제목 誌上移動座談會, 諧謔속에 實情 (On-the-Record Mobile Roundtable: Reality in Humor)
기사형태 대담·좌담 (Dialogue/Roundtable)

On-the-Record Mobile Roundtable: Reality in Humor
Centered on the Dong-A Ilbo, Song Jin-u, and Mr. Yi Kwang-su
By Paek Ryung

The editor sometimes comes up with these strange ideas, and there's no general who can stand to see people suffer. If he didn't play these tricks, he'd be a pretty good person...
He gathers all the reporters and says, "You, do this; you, do that; and you, do this." The swallow that comes back to me is a newspaper man.
Deep down, he wants to do an on-the-record mobile roundtable (have you readers ever seen such a roundtable?), but even so, which person at which newspaper should I get to say what?
There's a limit to what you can get away with even at Namdaemun. Anyway, sir, you're too good to go to hell when you die...
But if I say I can't do it, it's disrespectful to the person who asked me, and it's not befitting of my dignified image. So, I had no choice but to leave the office, but where should I turn? Should I go to Tapgol Park and see if I can find some miraculous story, or should I get my fortune told?
Well, the Dong-A Ilbo is relatively familiar, and their building is quite modern. And as for the office, they've practically set up a department store there.
I walked right into the second-floor editorial office, and everyone seemed to be in the middle of a meal, completely out of it.
Who should I grab? And what should I talk about? Well, since I'm here, let's start with the big boss, the bureau chief. But it turns out that the editorial director, Mr. Yi Kwang-su, is not at his desk.
Without hesitating, I rushed into the president's office, and what luck! The even bigger boss, Mr. Song Jin-u, was sitting in his unique sleeping posture and opened his eyes wide.
Mr. Song Jin-u's sleeping posture is legendary. I was one of his students when he was the principal of the former Chungang School (中央學校).
During exams (especially in winter), he would set the questions and then doze off in front of the warm stove. Thanks to that, our ethics scores were all perfect.

I told the waitress to call for Mr. Yi Kwang-su, and as I sat down in front of President Song, he asked with his broad mouth, "Aren't you busy?"
"No, I'm not too busy," I replied.
"Oh, I heard that the Kaebyoksa (開闢社) is planning a huge 10th-anniversary celebration. What are they doing?"
This is a complete reversal. I came to ask questions, but now I'm the one being questioned. But I can't very well refuse to answer.
"Yes, August is the anniversary month."
"I see... By the way... is that female reporter still there?"
"Yes—ha ha ha ha."
"Ha ha ha ha."
I need to explain this a bit.
When Ms. Kim Won-ju (金源珠) from our company first joined, she disguised herself as a job-seeking woman and did a mental test of the presidents of the three major newspapers. The article was not published due to certain circumstances, but Mr. Song Jin-u was completely fooled at the time. So, whenever he meets someone from Kaebyoksa, he seems to remember that incident.
"I was completely fooled... completely fooled, ha ha ha ha. So, why didn't you publish that article?"
"Well, there were some circumstances that prevented us from publishing it... This time, Ms. Kim Won-ju only wrote an impression of you."
"An impression? She probably wrote something bad about me again, right?"
"Not at all... But she did write that she found it amusing how you blinked your eyes while talking."
"Ha ha ha ha... That's because I have a tic... So, she noticed my eye twitch?"
"Yes."
"Ha ha ha ha."
At that moment, Mr. Yi Kwang-su came out of the reception room next to the president's office, holding a fountain pen and manuscript paper in his hand. He must have been writing a column and was caught by a guest and then caught by me.
I need to say something that won't betray the editor's expectations and the readers' interest, but what should I ask?
Well, since I've been doing things haphazardly from the start, I'll just ask whatever comes to mind.
"How many readers does the Dong-A Ilbo have?" I asked, but it was quite a foolish question.
"I don't know. I don't keep track of the Dong-A Ilbo's circulation. If I knew, I wouldn't be able to refuse to answer when someone asked me, so I don't keep track from the beginning."
Indeed, it's the editorial director's diplomatic language and Mr. Yi Kwang-su's clear refusal. Then let's ask President Song what he thinks...

"Mr. Song, do you know?"
"Twenty million," he said, blinking his eyes and moving his lips once.
Haha, this is also a president-style diplomatic language and Mr. Song Jin-u's answer. That makes sense. "Then, how many subscribers are there?"
When I asked this, President Song smiled awkwardly.
"Let's see, if we consider the Korean population to be 20 million, then one percent would be 200,000. It must be around 200,000..."
"Haha... 200,000 people, so that's 200,000 copies... Then the newspaper fees alone would be 200,000 won a month... That's quite a lot!"
"Ha ha ha ha."
"Ha ha ha ha."
Mr. Song and Mr. Yi laughed loudly like this. Then, President Song made another discount.
"But there are branch expenses... So, it must be around 100,000 won a month."
100,000 won! It's only three characters, but it's definitely not a small amount of money. But if the Dong-A Ilbo's fees alone bring in 100,000 won every month, and the advertising fees are probably about the same, then the Dong-A Ilbo must be rich... But there are no dividends... That's a mystery. Is there anyone among the readers who knows?
From now on, President Song is temporarily out of the circle, and the conversation begins between Mr. Yi Kwang-su and me.
What is the relationship between Korean journalism and authors?
Yi Well, the relationship is not very clear in Korea yet...

But if the Dong-A Ilbo were to publish a novel, there would be a selection process, and there would be certain standards and requests for the author, wouldn't there?
Yi Of course, there are. But in Korea, there are only a few people who can make a living from writing, so it's not a big problem. But in any case, authors can't refuse the requests of newspapers. If their work doesn't meet the conditions requested by the newspaper, it won't be published, and they won't receive a fee...
Then what kind of work does the Dong-A Ilbo request from authors?
Yi Well, I haven't been directly involved in that kind of thing until now, but if I were to be involved in the future, I wouldn't be able to publish pro-faction works. That's not because the pro-faction's work is bad, but because the current pro-faction works in Korea will only be read by a very small number of people with extremely sharp awareness.
Then, for example, the recent work "Extinction (寂滅)" by someone named Pak T'aewŏn (泊太苑)... It seems like a 100% bourgeois mental landscape novel?
Yi Yes, it was very well-written as an artistic literary work. Do you request that kind of work?
Yi No, I don't. That kind of work is also not acceptable. The general public doesn't want that.
Then is it just purely for entertainment, with no ideological content? Something like popular literature...?
Yi That's right.
But what about the Dong-A Ilbo's principles and claims...?
Yi Yes, of course. Even if you look at the Dong-A Ilbo's founding statement, it says that it's an expression organ of the Korean people...

Then shouldn't novels also be selected based on that kind of ideological content?
Yi Of course, that's right. Even if other things are different, I've mostly published my own serial novels...
Then, journalism dominating authors is still a fact, isn't it?
Yi That's right. But if you look at places like Japan, newspapers and new magazines have all become commercialized, so authors' works have also become completely commercialized. Because of that, works are thoroughly dominated by journalism, but in Korea, newspapers still dominate writing in order to fulfill their mission as the mouthpiece of society... Korean newspapers don't even think about profit sharing.
The conversation ended here... Wait, there's one more thing I want to ask.
"Mr. Yi, if you were to fall in love now?"
Yi Love? Haha, how could I fall in love? I think of love as a kind of disease, and while a disease can certainly arise suddenly overnight, there still needs to be a cause, doesn't there? And my love is all focused on my children now. So, I don't think I'll ever want to love another woman, and there probably isn't a woman who would want to love me now...

Aside from this, there were a few other conversations, but those were in other areas. My on-the-record mobile rather than 출장 roundtable with Mr. Song Jin-u and Mr. Yi Kwang-su ends here.

Centered on Aesthetic Surgery with Dr. Kim Ŭn-sŏn from Ch'ŏnghwa Hospital—Even Hormonal Theories!
By Roa

Doctor Kim Ŭn-sŏn... Reporter...
Reporter I'm sorry for suddenly coming here, but do you have some time to chat with me?
Doctor Yes, as you can see, I'm free. Especially these days, it's the end-of-year exam season, so the students who usually come can't make it.
Reporter Yes, I heard that you do aesthetic surgery. So, female students must come a lot. Why, I thought gisaengs (妓生) would come a lot...
Doctor Gisaengs, because they see customers every day, require a relatively long period of time, and because when you apply the medicine for the first time, there are marks left on the spot, they tend to excessively seek out cosmetics. This medicine is something I researched and tested about four years ago, and it's a combination of ephedrine, anabolysal, and anabolass cream. These three medicines are divided into stages 1, 2, and 3, and they remove blemishes, freckles, warts, and other pigments on the face. But some of them have roots that are spread out, so it can take over a year to completely cure them. Of course, after they're all removed, there are no traces left on the skin. That's why mostly housewives and female students come here a lot.
Reporter That's a wonderful business. You must receive a lot of admiration from young women. What could be more grateful than making young people's faces beautiful? Beauty is always a desperate lover who captures the hearts of youth, isn't it? Haha.
Doctor Haha. I suppose you could say that. Haha. But it's still just a side business that I'm testing out. If it expands a bit more in the future, I'm thinking of entrusting it to someone else.
Reporter By the way, do you do rhinoplasty or remove double eyelids? I think there are many specialists doing it in places like Japan?
Doctor No, there's no place doing it in Korea yet. If I get the chance, I'm thinking of going to Japan to learn it...
Reporter Paraffin injections don't last long, they say. If you have a fever or drink alcohol once, the raised nose will collapse, so what good is it?
Doctor These days, instead of those injections, they do incision surgery and insert something like ivory bone, so I don't think there are any worries about that. Double eyelids are easy to do.
Reporter Since we're talking about aesthetics, is there a suitable regulating agent for people who are excessively fat or thin? If you want to be a beauty, you have to fix your physique first, don't you? Haha. There seem to be quite a few women who are too worried and become hysterical. By the way, what about over-the-counter medicines sold in pharmacies? I think they're making a big fuss about "yaseru kusuri" (痩せる薬) and "futoru kusuri" (太る薬).
Doctor You can't trust those at all. In medicine, they're agonizing over trying to create such a medicine by researching the relationship between the thyroid gland and the ovaries (or testicles) and fat, but it's not easy to do well. And you can't trust over-the-counter medicines unless they're for a well-known disease. First of all, they can't accurately identify the symptoms and prescribe the medicine, and also, because the police's over-the-counter medicine ordinance restricts the amount of medicinal ingredients, even if it's the right medicine for the disease, it doesn't work well. Moreover, "yaseru kusuri (痩せる薬)" and such are completely out of the question.
Reporter Then what do you think about herbal medicine? It seems that Koreans see more effects from herbal medicine than Western medicine, and they value it more.
Doctor As for herbal medicine, herbal and woody materials are good. But first of all, herbal doctors lack basic knowledge in pathology and pharmacology, and they rely solely on books like Compendiums of Medicine (醫學便覽) or Dongui Bogam (東醫寶鑑) to formally take pulses and superficially examine symptoms to diagnose diseases, so they misdiagnose eight or nine times out of ten. Also, when preparing medicine, if you look at their dispensary texts, they remove a few heavy materials that are supposedly appropriate for the disease and add over ten kinds of medicinal materials that have no effect at all. How can that cure the disease?
Reporter Still, they say that if it matches the symptoms well in the Dongui Bogam method, it's a hundred percent effective. Also, it's strange that herbal doctors completely cure things that new doctors can't cure with difficult concoctions. Isn't herbal medicine better suited for the Korean constitution? Western medicine is based on the constitution of Westerners... At first glance, it seems that the new and old medical treatment methods are fundamentally different. For example, even for fevers like typhoid fever, herbal doctors heat the body and make it sweat, while new doctors cool the body with ice packs on the forehead and abdomen.
It's not that Koreans hide when they get this disease because they can just treat it at home by sweating, but because they never cool the fever at the hospital. Applying ice packs is to prevent the heat from going directly to the brain and causing confusion and severe suffering, so they cool the head to spread the heat down. This is the most common treatment method used in Japan. They apply ice packs to any disease. And as for disease, medicine is medicine, but first of all, the patient's psychology has a big impact on the illness. Herbal doctors have the demeanor of Taoist scholars or hermits, so they overwhelm the patient's mind, make them have empty beliefs, and their examinations are philosophical, so they give the patient a kind of superstitious trust, which gives the patient some comfort, so they unexpectedly see medicinal effects.
Reporter Are there any herbal medicine ingredients used in new medicines?
Doctor Why, there are many. Even new medicines take their raw materials from plants. To give you just a few examples, Chinese bellflower (桔梗), plantain (車前子), Job's tears (薏苡), cherry fruit (櫻實), mulberry fruit (桑實), Torreya nucifera oil (榧子油), digenea simplex (海人草), rice bran (米糠), ginseng (人蔘), polygala tenuifolia (遠志), apricot kernel water (杏仁水), ergot (麥角), cow-bezoar (犬黃), cinnamon (桂皮), orange peel (橙皮), chrysanthemum indicum (山菊), malt (麥芽), chaulmoogra oil (大風子油) all form important components of new medicines. But what's funny is that there's a medicine called gujeonjusa (九轉朱砂) that's used as a cure-all in herbal medicine these days, and when you analyze it, it's purely potassium nitrate. Nevertheless, herbal doctors claim it's a very hard-to-find medicine and gather dregs that stick to urine and coat them with red paint to make it, but you can make potassium nitrate as much as you want. However, Koreans are currently caught in the middle of herbal medicine and new medicine and are floundering. For example, if they get a diagnosis from a new doctor that they have a disease that will take twenty days to cure, they hear from a herbal doctor that they can completely recover with a few doses of medicine and use herbal medicine. If they don't get any effect from herbal medicine, they run back to the new doctor, and in the process of using this medicine and that medicine, the disease becomes serious.
Reporter How is the interest in disease among Koreans compared to before? They say that Westerners walk to the hospital on their own, while Koreans ride in rickshaws, don't they?
Doctor Yes, that point has improved a lot. People who are very poor can't help it, but if they're even a little well-off, they run to the hospital even if they just have a slight headache. It's worrying because they come too much.
Reporter Excuse me, but when a doctor can't properly diagnose a patient's symptoms, what kind of attitude do they take?
Doctor If you're a doctor, you're no better than false teeth. We generally consider everything that's known about people's diseases so far. But the cellular organization of the human body is so complex that we sometimes misdiagnose. Even a headache can have so many causes. However, if it's not their specialty or if it's a disease that requires treating the main cause first, they usually send them to a specialist in that field to receive treatment.
Reporter By the way, what's the most difficult disease to cure these days?
Doctor It's probably cancer. There's no medicine to cure it yet. We just do surgery for temporary treatment, but it keeps coming back, so it's not effective at all. And there's no reliable medicine for tuberculosis. Lung disease can be treated in its early stages. Once it reaches stage 2, there's no hope.
Reporter What's a recent issue in the medical community?
Doctor The issue of separating doctors and pharmacists is being discussed a lot. That is, doctors only examine and prescribe, and the pharmacist is solely responsible for dispensing the medicine. (What I wanted to know was an academic issue...)
Reporter By the way, I saw someone getting surgery for something like appendicitis without anesthesia because they said anesthesia shortens your lifespan. Is that true?
Doctor How could that be! It's more harmful not to use anesthesia. Anesthetics like chloroform and ether have a temporary effect and only confuse the nerves, but they don't leave any lasting effects on the body after they wear off.
Reporter There's a saying that female athletes can't get pregnant. What about that?
Doctor Female athletes are prone to cardiomegaly. So, that can affect childbirth and lead to difficult labor, but it doesn't prevent them from getting pregnant.
Reporter These days, the issue of birth control seems to be becoming a practical bourgeois concept in real life. Is there a simple contraception method that any family can use?
Doctor There are many, but when you talk about contraception, it's like you're talking about a life, so people often think about it in terms of morality, and I don't like to talk about it unless the person involved comes and discusses it sincerely. The easiest, simplest, and most harmless method is to use a douche or wash the area after intercourse (OO後局部) with cold water. Of course, there are also physical and chemical methods that use surgery or light.
Reporter Is washing with cold water effective?
Doctor Yes, it is. It seems that they're doing it a lot in places like France. They have a simple washing machine installed next to the bed, so you can just press a switch and cold water will pour out. Cold water is neutral and has the effect of killing sperm.
Reporter It's too much of a hassle to wash it every time... By the way, they say that if a woman has relationships with several men, her blood becomes impure and even her personality changes. What do you think about that from a medical perspective?
Doctor According to research published by Waldeyer-Hartz in Vienna and Dr. Eckrell, even one sexual encounter creates a special zymogen for male sperm or hormones (internal secretion) in the woman's blood, causing a kind of biological reaction. That's why the personality of prostitutes (娼婦) who have a lot of contact with men is different from that of ordinary women.
Reporter Good men with bad hearts who only force chastity on women will like this as a reason to quote and prove.
Doctor Haha, the fact is that women are physiologically in a much more unfavorable situation than men.
Reporter These days, doctors' dignity has declined a lot, and people's trust in them seems to be weakening. I often hear things like this: for example, if a beautiful woman comes to see them, they deliberately prolong the treatment period even if the disease is curable. And they say that when they examine them, they examine places that they don't need to see. For a young and beautiful woman, that's more dangerous than the disease itself, isn't it? Haha.
Doctor Could that happen? I've even heard of doctors with PhDs in Japan being charged with abortion and adultery, but unless they're a special pervert, is it possible for a doctor to feel lust for a patient, even if she's beautiful? A doctor treating a patient is like an artist treating a nude model. And when patients come to the hospital, they just walk in anywhere after seeing the sign... Maybe there are some such elements in the world, but...
Reporter What kind of lifestyle hobbies do doctors usually have?
Doctor Well, I don't know about other people's hobbies, but generally speaking, doctors only see the unfortunate aspects of everyday life, so they naturally seek alcohol and women to comfort and relieve their mental suffering and fatigue. That's a common trend. However, for those who sincerely study with a scholarly attitude, treating patients and diagnosing diseases is, of course, a supreme hobby.

**Named Entities**

宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
李光洙	Yi Kwang-su
白菱	Paek Ryung
金源珠	Kim Wŏn-ju
泊太苑	Pak T'aewŏn
清華醫院	Ch'ŏnghwa Hospital
金殷善	Kim Ŭn-sŏn
로아	Roa
南大門	Namdaemun
中央學校	Chungang Hakkyo
開闢社	Kaebyŏksa
Tapgol Park	T'apkol Park
倭爾沙타인	Waldeyer-Hartz
에-크렐	E-k'ŭrel
Dongui Bogam	東醫寶鑑
醫學便覽	Ŭihak P'yŏllam
桔梗	Kilkŏng
車前子	Ch'ajŏnja
薏苡	Ŭiyŏ
櫻實	Ŏngsil
桑實	Sangsŏl
榧子油	Pija Yu
海人草	Haeincho
米糠	Mik'ang
人蔘	Insam
遠志	Wŏnji
杏仁水	Haengin Su
麥角	Maekkak
犬黃	Kyŏnhwang
桂皮	Kyep'i
橙皮	Tŭngp'i
山菊	Sankuk
麥芽	Maek'a
大風子油	Taep'ungja Yu
九轉朱砂	Kujeonjusa
佛蘭西	Pŭranch'i



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제28호
발행일	1930년 05월 01일
기사제목	誌上移動座談會, 諧謔속에 實情
기사형태	대담·좌담

誌上移動座談會, 諧謔속에 實情
東亞報를 中心으로 宋鎭禹
李光洙氏를 붓잡고
白菱

編輯者는 각금가다 이런 야릇한 考察을 해노코 사람을 애를 태우게 하는데는 견데내는 장수가 업다.
이런 변덕만 부리지 아니하면 사람은 꽤 조흔데. ...
記者를 죽 모아노코는 너는 그것 하는 사람 또 너는 저것 하는 사람 또 너는 이것 하는 사람 또 너는 하고 내에게로 도라 온 제비가 신문사ㅅ 사람이다.
속으로는 지금 誌上 移動 座談會(讀者 諸君 이런 座談會도 구경햇소?)를 해보자는 것인데 그것도 그러커니와 대관절 어는 新聞社의 무엇하는 사람에게 무슨 말을 어터케 들어오란 말이야?
南大門入納도 분수가 잇지 엇잿든 선생님 죽어서 地獄에는 못갈걸. ...
그러나 못한다고 하면 말한 사람의 대접도 아니요. 점잔헌 나의 체면도 아니되고 할 수 업시 社를 나서기는 하엿스나 어데로 대가리를 두루고 갈가? 탑골公園에 가서 어데로 가야 신통스러운 이약이라도 하고 올가 점이나 처볼가?
에라 비교적 낫치 만히 익은 東亞日報는 집이 꽤 모던이야. 그러고 자리도 新聞社로는 그 자리에다 떼파-트를 하나 벌너놋켓구만.
2층 편집국으로 쑥 들어서니까 한참들 밥버서 정신이 업는 모양이다.
누구를 붓잡을가. 또 무슨 이약이를＜84＞ 할가? 에라 기왕이니 큼직한 局長한테 부터 보자. 그러나 맛침 편집국장 李光洙氏가 자리에 보이지 아니한다.
덥허노코 社長室로 뛰여 들어가니까 이거 웬 땡니냐. 더 큰 社長 宋鎭禹씨가 氏의 독특한 座睡를 하고 게시다가 눈을 번ㅅ적 뜬다.
宋鎭禹씨의 座睡야말로 逸話가 만타. 氏가 前前 中央學校의 校長으로 게실 때에 나도 그 門下에서 배우든 한사람이다.
그런데 試驗때면(특히 겨울) 문제를 내어 노코 뜨뜻한 煖爐 엽헤서 선생님 으레히 꾸벅 절을 한바탕씩 느러지게 한군하엿다. 그 德에 우리의 修身點數는 전부 滿點이엿고.
女給仕를 식혀서 李光洙씨를 請하여 두고 宋社長의 압자리에 안즈닛가
『밥부지나 안헌가?』하고 그 넙죽한 입으로 말을 건넌다.
『네 과히 밥부지는 안슴니다.』
『저- 참 開闢社에서 10주년 기념사업을 굉장하게 한다지? 무엇무엇인가?』
이거야 말로 乙丑甲子다. 이약이를 물으러 간 내가 되리여 질문을 당한 격이다. 그러나 대답은 아니할 수야 인나.
『네 오는 팔월이 기념ㅅ달 이니까요.』
『그러구. ... 참 ... 그 그 女記者 그대로 잇나?』
『네- 허허허허.』
『허허허허.』
여긔에 대하여는 좀 설명이 잇서야 한다.
우리 社의 金源珠씨가 처음 입사하엿슬때에 求職婦人으로 假裝하고 三大新聞社 社長 멘탈레스트를 한 일이 잇섯다. 그 記事는 엇더한 사정으로 발표치는 못하엿스나 그때에 宋鎭禹씨도 깜빡 속아가지고 톡톡히 當한 것만은 사실이다. 그래서 언제나 開闢社의 사람을 맛나면 그 일이 뭇득뭇득 생각키는 모양이다.
『깜ㅅ박 속앗거든 ... 깜ㅅ박 속앗서 허허허허. 그래 그 記事는 웨 발표허잔햇나.』
『네 무슨 사정이 잇서서 발표를 못햇고.. 이번에 金源洙씨가 선생님 印象記만 썻슴니다.』
『印象記? 또 또 욕썻것구만?』
『천만에요. ... 그러나 선생님이 이약이를 허시면서 눈을 끔적끔적 허시는 것이 엇지나 우수웟든지 몰낫다고는 썻슴니다.』
『허허허허. ... 그게 내가 風이 잇서서 그런건데. ... 그래 눈ㅅ짓으로 알엇단 말이지?』
『네.』
『허허허허.』
이 때 맛침 李光洙씨가 사장실엽 응접실에서 손에 만년필과 원고지를 들고 나온다. 아마 社說을 쓰다가 손님에게 붓잽혀 갓다가 또 나에게 붓잽힌 세움이 되엿다.
編輯者의 企待와 讀者의 흥미를 背叛치 아니할 이약이를 해야할 터인데 대관절 무슨 말을 뭇나?
에라 애초부터 되는대로 해왓스니까 그저 되는대로 물어라.
『東亞日報 讀者가 얼마나 됨니까?』 이러케 뭇기는 하엿지만 나도 꽤 어리석은 질문이다.
『거 몰음니다. 나는 東亞日報 部數를 알어 두지를 안햇스닛가요. 알어 두엇다가 누구가 뭇는데 대답을 아니 할 수도 업고 그래서 애초부터 알어 두지를 아니햇슴니다.』
과연 편집국장의 외교적 詞令이요 李光洙씨 다운 뚜렷한 謝絶이다. 그러면 宋社長은＜85＞ 무어라고 대답하나 물어보자. ...
『宋선생님은 아시겟지요?』
『2천만명』하고 눈을 한번 꿈적 입을 한번 움ㅅ죽 한다.
하하 이것은 또 社長式 外交 詞令이요 宋鎭禹씨 다운 대답이다. 그것도 그럴 것이야. 『그러면 購讀者의 數는 얼마나 됨니까?』
이러케 물으니까는 宋社長도 좀 대답에 어색한 지 싱긋이 웃는다.
『가만잇자 朝鮮 사람을 2천만명 잡고 그 백분지이면 20만이지. 20만명은 되겟지. ...』
『하하. ... 20만명이면 20만부라. ... 그러면 신문 대금만도 한달에 20만원임니다 그려. ... 꽤 만히 되는걸요!』
『하하하하.』
『하하하하.』
이러케 宋李雨씨는 크게 웃는다. 그러고 나서 다시 宋社長이 에누리를 한다.
『그러치만 支局의 비용도 잇스니까. ... 그저 한달에 10만은 되겟지.』
10만원! 10만원! 글ㅅ자는 석자지만 결코 적은 돈이 아니다. 그런데 東亞日報의 代金으로만 10만원이 매월 수입된다면 그러고 광고요금도 그만큼은 될 터이니까 東亞日報가 곳 부자가 될터인데. ... 그래도 配當이 업다니. ... 그것 참 모를 일이다. 讀者諸君중에 누구 아는 사람이 업소.
지금부터는 宋社長은 잠시 圈外에서고 李光洙씨와 나사이에 이약이가 벌어진다.
朝鮮의 짜나리즘과 著作者의 관계가 엇덧슴니까?
李 글세요. 아직 朝鮮에서는 그 관계가 그닥지 분명치 안흔걸이요. ...
그러치만 가령 東亞日報에서 小說를 실닐터인데 거긔 대한 選擇이 잇슬것이고 따러서 作者에 대해서 그러한 標準의 注文이 잇슬 것이 아님니까.
李 그거야 잇지요. 그러나 朝鮮에서는 그러케 原稿로 생활을 유지하여 가는 사람이 불과 멧치 아니되니까 큰 문제도 되지 안켓지만 하여간 作者로써 新聞社의 요구에 應치 아니 할 수는 업겟지요. 新聞社에서 요구하는 條件에 合當치 아니하면 그 작품을 실니지를 안코 따러서 稿料도 밧지 못하게 될 것이고. ...
그러면 東亞日報에서는 作者에게 엇더한 作品을 요구하심니까?
李 글세올시다. 지금까지는 내가 직접 그런 것에 대한 取扱을 하지는 아니하엿슴니다만은 압흐로 取扱을 하게 된다면 푸로派의 작품은 실니지 못하겟슴니다. 그것은 그 派의 작품이 까버서라는 것 보담 현재 朝鮮의 푸로派의 작품은 의식이 극히 첨예한 극소수 사람에게만 일키울 것이니닛가요.
그러면 가령 요전에 실닌 泊太苑이라는 사람의 寂滅가치. ... 100%의 뿌르心鏡 小說 갓드군요?
李 네 藝術派 文藝로 썩 잘 썻슴니다. 그런 작품를 요구하심니까?
李 아-니요. 그것도 역시 안됨니다. 일반민중은 그런 것을 요구하지 아니하닛가요.
그러면 그저 아모 思想 內容도 업는 純 趣味 本位의 것임니까? 大衆 文藝 갓흔 것. ...
李 그러지요.
그러나 東亞日報의 主義와 主張? ... ...
李 네 물론 東亞日報의 創刊詞를 보더래도 朝鮮民族의 表現機關이라고 하엿스닛가. ... ...
그러면 小說갓흔 것도 그러한 意識內容을 가진 것으로 選擇해야 아니하겟슴니까.＜86＞
李 물론 그럿슴니다. 달은 것은 그러찬타 더래도 長篇의 繼續 小說은 그동안 대부분 내것을 실녀 왓는데. ... ...
그러면 짜-나리즘이 著作者을 支配하는 것만은 엇잿거나 事實이지요?
李 그럿슴니다. 그러나 일본 갓흔 데를 보면 新聞이나 新雜誌가 전부 商業化하엿기 때문에 著作者의 작품도 완전히 商品化하엿고 그러하기 때문에 작품이 철뎌하게 짜나리즘의 支配를 밧고 잇지만 朝鮮에 잇서서는 新聞은 아직도 社會의 木鐸의 使命을 다하기 위하야 著作을 支配한다고 하겟지요. ... 朝鮮의 新聞들이 利益配當갓흔 것은 全然 생각치도 못하고 잇슴니다.
여기까지 이약이는 끗치 낫는데 ... 가만잇자 또 한가지 물어 볼 것이 잇다.
『李선생이 가령 지금 연애를 하신다면?』
李 戀愛요. 허허 내가 어터케 연애를 헐 수가 잇나요? 연애라는 것을 나는 일종의 病으로 생각하는데 病이라는 것이 물론 하로ㅅ밤 사이에 갑작히 생기는 수도 잇기는 하지만 그래도 무슨 원인이 잇서야 아니 하겟슴니까? 그러고 나는 사랑이라는 것이 지금은 전부 子息에게로 쏠녀 잇스닛가요. 그래서 내 마음에서 누구 달은 여자를 사랑하고 십흔 생각이 나지 아니할 것 갓고 또 어느 여자가 지금와서 나를 사랑하려고 할 여자도 업슬 것이니까요. ...

이밧게 약간 달은 이약이는 한것이 잇스나 그것은 달은 방면의 것이요. 나의 宋鎭禹씨 及 李光洙씨와의 移動 보담도 出張-座談會는 이것으로 끗이다.

淸華醫院 金殷善氏와 美容術을 中心으로 - 홀몬說까지
로아

醫師 金殷善씨. ... 記者. ...
記者 돌연히 차저 와서 未安함니다만 나하고 좀 閒談하실 시간이 잇슬넌지요.
醫師 네 뭐 보시는 바와가치 한가함니다. 요새는 더구나 학년말 시험때가 되여서요. 늘 오는 학생들이 못오게 되닛가요.
記者 네 참 美容施術을 하신다지요. 그래서 여학생들이 만히둀¤ 옴니다그려. 왜요 妓生들이 만히 올것 갓흔데요. ...
醫師 妓生들이란 하로하로 客을 대하는 관계상 비교적 時日이 오래 걸니고 첫제 처음 藥을 발으면 그 자리에 자욱이 나는 까닭으로 지나치기 化粧品을 찻게 되는게지요. 이 藥은 내가 한 4년전에 연구해서 시험한 것인데 에페린 해부쌀 해부라씨 크림 세가지 올시다. 이 세가지 약으로 1기 2기 3기로 논아서 얼골에 잇는 죽은깨 짐 사마구갓흔 色素를 빼내는 것인데 그런 것도 뿌리가 퍼저 잇서서 完治하랴면 1년이나 넘어 걸니는 것도 잇슴니다. 물론 다 빠진 다음에는＜87＞ 皮膚에 아무른 흔적도 남지 안슴니다. 그런 관계로 대개 가정 부인이나 여학생들이 만히 차저 온담니다.
記者 네 훌륭한 사업이 올시다. 젊은 婦女子들에게 만흔 欽仰을 바드시겟슴니다. 젊은이들의 얼골을 입부게 해 주는 것보다 더 고마운 일이 어데 잇나요. 美란 언제든 청춘의 마음을 사로 잡는 간절한 戀人이닛가요. 하하하.
醫師 허허. 그럿타고 할넌지요. 허허. 그러나 아즉 한낫 副業的으로 試驗하고 잇는 중이닛가요. 압흐로 좀 더 확장이 되면은 다른 사람한테 맛겨 바릴가 하고 잇슴니다.
記者 그런데 隆鼻術이나 삼가풀 지우는 수술은 하시지 안슴닛가. 日本갓흔데서는 專門家들이 만히들 하고 잇는 모양이지요?
醫師 네 朝鮮서는 아즉 하는 데가 업슴니다. 機會만 잇스면 日本가서 좀 배워올 가 하고 잇슴니다만. ...
記者 파라훤 注射는 오래 가지 못한다고요. 熱病이나 한번 알코나면 놉힌 코 장둥이가 문허진다니 어데 되겟서요.
醫師 요새 와서는 그 注射말고 切開手術을 해서 象牙갓흔 뼈를 해넛키 때문에 그런 念慮는 업는가 봅듸다. 삼가풀 갓흔 건 쉽게 되고요.
記者 美容 이약이가 낫스니 말삼임니다만 程度 以上으로 살찌고 여위고 한사람에게 적당한 調節之劑가 업슬가요. 美人이 되랴면 體格부터 곳처야 하지 안슴닛가. 허허 그 따외 너무 苦憫하야 히스테리를 이르키는 여자들이 상당히 만흔가 봅듸다. 그런데 洋藥房에서 파는 賣藥갓흔 것은 엇데요. 「야세루 구수리」「후도루 구수리」란 게 굉장히 떠들고 잇는 모양인데요.
醫師 그것은 도뎌히 미들 수 업지요. 醫學상으로는 갑상선과 난소(或 睾丸)의 관계라든지 지방질에 대한 것을 연구하야 그런 藥을 만들어 보랴고 苦心은 하나 어듸 간단히 잘 되여야지요. 그리고 賣藥이란 잘 아는 병들어 난 藥이 아닌 다음에는 미들 수 업지요. 첫제 病症을 잘잡어 藥을 마처 쓸 수가 업는 것과 또 경찰의 賣藥令에 제한이 잇서서 약성분량을 뭇척 주려서 調劑하기 때문에 설사 그 병에 맛는 약이라도 효과가 잘 들어나지 안슴니다. 더구나 「야세루 구수리⾀갓흔 것은 문제 밧기겟지요.
記者 그럼 漢藥에 대해서는 엇듯케 생각하심닛가. 朝鮮사람은 洋藥보다 漢藥에서 더 효과를 보는 모양이고 또 소중히 알고 잇는데요.
醫師 漢藥도 草根木皮의 藥材만은 좃슴니다. 그러나 첫제 漢醫들이란 병리학이나 약학상 素養이 업고 오즉 한 卷醫學便覽이나 東醫寶鑑갓흔 책자에 憑據하야 형식적으로 집맥을 하고 극히 소홀하게 병증을 살펴서 論病을 하기 때문에 오진할 때가 十常八九요 또 劑藥하는 데 잇서서는 그들의 藥房文을 볼것 갓흐면 몃가지 그 病에 합당하다는 重材를 빼고는 아무 效能도 업는 藥材를 십여가지식 늘어 노앗슴니다. 그려! 그러고야 병이 나을 수가 잇나요.
記者 그래도 東醫寶鑑 방식으로 증세에 잘 밧으면 백발백중이라는데요. 그러고 新醫로서 곳치지 못한 것을 漢醫가 어럽§€ 안케 造藥 비슷한 것으로 완치해내니 이상하지가 안슴닛가. 朝鮮 사람 체질에는 漢藥이 맛는 게 아닐가요. 洋藥은 서양사람들의 체질을 표준한게고. ... 얼는 보면 新舊醫 療治方法이 근본적으로 다른 것 갓습듸다. 가령 膓窒扶斯갓흔 熱病도 漢醫는 이열치열이라 하야 몸을 덥게 하고 땀을 흘니게 하는데 新醫들은 이마와 배에다 어름 찜질을 해서 몸을 식히는 療法을 취하지 안슴닛가.＜88＞
朝鮮사람이 이런 病에 걸엿슬 때 숨기고 잇는 것은 집에서 치료하면 땀이나 흘니고 나을 것을 避病院에 결코 熱을 풀지 안는 것이 안임니다. 어름찜질을 하는 것은 熱이 당장 腦에 올나가서 정신이 희미해지고 고민이 심하닛가 머리를 식혀서 熱을 알로 퍼지게 하는 것인데 日本서 가장 만히 쓰고 잇는 療治方法 임니다. 무슨 病에든지 어름찜질을 하닛가요. 그리고 病이란 藥도 藥이러니와 첫제 환자의 심리여하가 병세에 만흔 영향을 미치는 것인데 漢醫들은 道學者나 仙術客갓흔 風度를 가지고 환자의 마음을 威壓하게 되며 부질업시 信念을 가지게 하고 또 진찰하는게 철학적이여서 환자로 하야금 일종 미신적 신망을 가지게 하야 患者에게 저윽히 安慰를 주는 까닭으로 의외로 약효를 보게 되는게지요.
記者 漢藥 原材로 新藥에 쓰는 것은 업나요.
醫師 왜 만치요. 新藥이라 해도 식물성에서 그 원료를 취하는 것이 여간 만치가 안슴니다. 대강 몃가지만 들어 본다드래도 桔梗, 車前子, 薏苡, 櫻實, 桑實, 榧子油, 海人草, 米糠, 人蔘, 遠志, 杏仁水, 麥角, 犬黃, 桂皮, 橙皮, 山菊, 麥芽, 大風子油등은 다 각각 중요한 新藥의 성분을 이루고 잇슴니다. 그런데 우수운 것은 요새 漢藥에서 百病痛治格으로 쓰이는 九轉朱砂란 藥이 잇는데 이것을 분석해 보면 순전히 硝酸加里임니다. 그럼에도 불고하고 漢醫들은 아주 구하기 어려운 藥가치 떠들고 오줌에 끼이는 버금이를 끄러모아 가지고 그 우에 朱칠을 해서 만드는 모양인데 硝酸加里쯤이야 얼마든지 만들어 낼 수가 잇지 안슴닛가. 그런데 朝鮮사람들은 시방 漢藥과 新藥의 중간에 들어서 해매이고 잇슴니다. 가령 新醫의 진찰을 바다 이십일에 나흘 病이라면 그것보다 단 藥 몃첩으로 완쾌할 수 잇다는 漢醫의 말을 듯고 漢藥을 쓰게 됨니다. 그리하야 漢藥에서 효과를 엇지 못하면 또 新醫에게로 달여오고 이럿케 이藥 저藥을 쓰는 가운데 병은 중태에 빠지고 마는 수가 만슴니다.
記者 朝鮮사람들의 病에 대한 관심은 前과 엇데요. 서양사람들은 제발로 걸어서 病院에 가고 朝鮮사람들은 人力車를 타고 간다지 안슴닛가.
醫師 네 그 점은 만히 깨엿슴니다. 아주 形便이 곤난한 사람은 엇절 수 업지만 위연 만치 지내는 사람이면 머리만 조곰 압허도 病院으로 달여오는 터임니다. 너무 만히 와서 걱정이지요.
記者 失禮 말슴이올시다만 診察을 해서도 患者의 病症을 바로 잡지 못하는 경우에 醫師로서는 엇더한 태도를 취함닛가.
醫師 醫師라면 入齒만 못하지 시방까지 알여진 사람의 病에 대해서는 대강은 다 斟酌하는 터이닛가요. 그야 원래 인체의 세포조직이란 너무도 복잡한 것이닛가. 혹 誤診하는 때도 업지 안치요. 두통 하나도 그 원인이 여간 만만치가 안으닛가요. 그러나 자기 전문이 아니라든지 主因되는 병을 먼저 곳처야 할 病이면은 대개 그 방면의 專門醫한테로 보내서 치료를 밧도록 함니다.
記者 그런데 요새 제일 難治의 病은 무엇님닛가.
醫師 아마 癌이겟지요. 이것은 아즉 곳친다는 藥이 업슴니다. 그저 수술이나 해서 일시적 치료를 하지만 뒤를 니어서 생기는 것이닛가 아무 효능이 업슴니다. 그리고 결핵균에 대해서는 자신잇는 藥이 發明되지 못햇슴니다. 肺病도 초기에 잇서는 치료할 수가 잇슴니다. 2기만 되면 희망이 업스닛가요.＜89＞
記者 最近 醫學界에 엇던 것이 문제되여 잇슴닛가.
의사 의사와 약제사의 분리 문제가 퍽 만히 논의되고 잇슴니다. 즉 의사는 진찰을 하고 처방이나 하지 제약하는 것은 순전히 약제사에게 맛시자는 것임니다.(내가 알고자 한 것은 學術上 문제엿다만은. ...)
記者 참 몽혼을 하면 수명을 감한다는 이유로 盲腸炎기 갓흔 것을 몽혼하지 안코 수술을 밧는 사람을 보앗는데 그것이 사실일가요.
醫師 그럴 리가 잇나요! 몽혼을 하지 안는 게 더 害로웁슴니다. 크로로호름이나 에텔갓흔 몽혼劑는 작용이 일시적에 긋치는 것으로 오즉 신경을 혼미하게 할 뿐이지 發散한 뒤에는 몸에 아무른 영향도 남기지 안슴니다.
記者 여자 운동 선수가 姙娠을 못한다는 말이 잇는데 그건 엇덧슴닛가.
醫師 여자 운동 선수는 心臟胞大症에 걸니기가 쉬웁슴니다. 그래서 그것이 출산에도 관계가 미처서 難産에 이르는 수가 잇슴니다만 姙娠을 못하거나 하지는 안슴니다.
記者 요사이 産兒制限 문제가 현실 생활의 適切한 부르지즘의 하나가 되여 잇는 모양인데 어느 가정에서도 시행할 수 잇는 간략한 피임법이 업슬가요.
醫師 잇기야 만히 잇지요만은 피임이라 하면 발서 한낫 생명을 두고 하는 말가치 되여 도덕문제까지 부처서 생각하는 수가 만허서 當者가 와서 진심으로 論議하는 게 아니면 말하기를 실허하지요. 제일 하기 쉽고 간단하고 뒤탈이 업는 방법으로야 루-데삭구를 사용하든지 OO後局部를 冷水로 洗滌하는 것 밧게 더 업지요. 물론 手術을 한다든가 光線을 쓰는 理化學的 方法도 잇슴니다만. ...
記者 冷水로 洗滌하는 게 효과가 잇슬가요.
醫師 잇지요. 佛蘭西갓튼 데서는 만히들 실행하고 잇는 모양입듸다. 여자들 寢臺엽헤다 簡便한 洗滌器를 裝置해 두어서 스윗치만 눌으면 冷水가 쏘다저 나오게 되여 잇담니다. 冷水란 中性으로 精虫의 勢力을 뭇지르는 효능을 가지고 잇스닛가요.
記者 그거 일일히 씻기가 성가서서 어듸 하겟슴닛가. ... 그런데 여자가 여러 남자들하고 關係를 하게 되면 血腋이 불순해지고 性格까지도 달너진다는데 醫學上으로 보아 엇더한지요.
醫師 윈나의 왈드사타인이나 에-크렐 博士의 연구발표한 것을 들으면 1회의 交接으로도 女體의 血腋 가운데 남성의 精虫이나 호르몬(內分泌腋)에 대한 특수한 醱酵素가 생겨서 일종의 생물학적 反應을 이르킨다 하엿슴니다. 이러한 關係로 남자들하고 만히 接觸하게 되는 娼婦들의 性向이 보통 여자와 달너지는 것도 이유가 여긔 잇는 것이지요.
記者 여자들에게만 貞操를 강요하는 배ㅅ심 조흔 남자들이 조와 引證할 이유꺼리가 되겟슴니 그려.
醫師 허허 여자란 生理上으로 발서 남자보다 퍽 불리한 形便에 잇는 것은 사실이지요.
記者 요사이 의사들의 品位가 만히 低落이 되여서 일반의 信任이 엷어지는 모양갓흔데 이런 말을 흔히 듯는데요. 가령 얼골이나 입분 婦人 환자가 차저 오게 되면 곳 나을 병이라도 일부러 治療期日을 느런다니요. 그러고 診察할 때는 일부러 안보아도 조흔 곳까지 診察을 한다고요. 妙齡美人으로서야 病보다 더 위험한 일이 아니예요. 허허
醫師 그런 일이 잇슬나구요. 허기야 日本서는 學博士의 位를 가진 醫師들이 墮胎事件 姦通事件으로 起訴가 된 일까지도 업지 안엇슴니다만 특별한 色魔가 아닌 다음에는 설사 미인이라손치드래도 환자를 보고 肉情을 이르키는 수야 잇나요. 醫師가 환자를 대하는 것이란 화가가 나체모델을 대하는 것과 갓슴넨다. 그러고 환자가 病院으로 차저 올때는 지나다 看板만 보고 아모데나 쑥드러 오는 게 아니닛가요. ... ... 一魚濁水格으로 或 그런한 分子가 업는 것도 아니겟지요만. ...
記者 醫師들께서는 대개 엇더한 방면에 생활 취미를 가지게 되나요.
醫師 글세올시다. 남의 취미야 알 수가 업지만 대개로 말슴한다면 醫師들이란 日常 인생의 불행한 일면만을 보게 되는 관계로 그 마음의 시달니움과 疲勞를 慰撫 식히자면 자연 酒色을 찻게 되는 모양이지요. 그러한 경향이 만슴니다. 그러나 學究的 태도로 진실하게 硏究해 나아가는 사람에게는 환자를 대하며 病을 診斷하는 것이 그대로 無上한 취미가 될 것은 물론임니다.＜90＞
＜84-90＞