잡지명 別乾坤 제69호
발행일 1934년 01월 01일
기사제목 유모어 오케스트라, 漫談 (Humor Orchestra, Essay)
기사형태 잡저 (Miscellany)

Necklace
Yun Baek-nam

Women are the incarnation of vanity.
Although I walk the night road, I unabashedly express this detestable thought. However, no matter what, women are more vain than men, and no one can deny this obvious fact.
"Hey..."
As soon as her husband, who had resigned from his company, returned home, she frantically called out to him as if she had just received five or six telegrams.
"What is it?"
"Look at this. An invitation has arrived."
The invitation stated that a soiree would be held on XX day, and it requested the pleasure of their company. It was signed by a well-known businessman of the time.
"Honey, you should use this opportunity to get to know several celebrities. What a wonderful chance! I wonder who introduced us. I'm so grateful... But I..."
XX furrowed her brow with a troubled expression on her lovely face.
"What about you?"
"I have one dress for outings, but if it's a soiree, noble ladies will be there. I need to wear a necklace. Don't you think so?"
This newlywed couple, despite having married for love, occasionally had minor disagreements due to financial issues. Whenever this happened, the husband felt a pang in his heart, and now, upon hearing the word "necklace," his vision momentarily darkened.
"Given the suddenness of this, how can we afford a 'necklace' with our current finances?"
The couple put aside the thought of dinner and racked their brains to figure out how to attend the soiree without falling behind others. As a result, they decided to visit Mrs. OO, who lived next door.
Mrs. OO was a wealthy widow who owned several necklaces. So, without embarrassment, they planned to borrow one.
Indeed, Mrs. OO felt sympathetic. Without hesitation, she lent them a dazzling diamond necklace worth 50,000 won.
XX borrowed it and eagerly flipped through the calendar several times a day, waiting for the day of the soiree to arrive.
The long-awaited soiree day arrived.
The couple proudly attended the party, eating, drinking, and dancing.
In her excitement, XX drank a large amount of alcohol, which she couldn't normally tolerate. Only when she became disoriented did she feel embarrassed and go out onto the balcony for some fresh air. She sat leaning against the railing and fell asleep.
When her husband came looking for her, XX was snoring softly.
"Hey, why are you sleeping? How embarrassing!"
The husband shook XX's shoulder and scolded her in a low voice. His wife startled awake.
"Oh, dear, what about the necklace?"
The husband was surprised to see that his wife wasn't wearing the necklace and asked about it.
"Huh? Oh my goodness, what's going on?"
XX's face turned pale, and the husband's face changed colors, resembling a mottled chicken. The diamond necklace had clearly been stolen.
The couple returned home in despair.
"What are we going to do about this?"
"50,000 won - 50,000 won - Oh, it seems our life is over!"
The couple discussed the matter late into the night, but there was no solution.
They packed a meager bundle of belongings and fled to their hometown that very night.

Ten years passed.
On a stormy day, it happened to be the evening of the day the soiree had been held ten years prior.
A haggard-looking man and woman stood before the mansion of the wealthy widow.

"I don't recognize you."
"You may not. We are the couple who borrowed the necklace ten years ago and then ran away."
"Oh, yes, that's right... But why did you run away that night?"
With tears in their eyes, the couple began to tell their story:
"That night at the party, the necklace was stolen. How could we have the audacity to say we lost it? Of course, we didn't have the money to compensate... After discussing it, we decided to leave this place that night. So, for the past ten years, we've been saving every penny by economizing on food <8> and clothing, but we've only managed to save 20,000 won. It's not 50,000 won, but please forgive our sincerity and don't hold us further accountable for our sin."
With that, they handed over 20,000 won from their bag.
The widow stared at the money and the couple with a mixed expression of emotions, and then she suddenly collapsed and began to sob.
"Why are you doing this?"
"No, please forgive me. That necklace wasn't worth 50,000 won; it was actually a cheap imitation. My petty vanity prevented me from telling you the truth, and now I realize that I've caused a young couple to waste ten precious years of their lives. I should be prostrating myself at your feet and begging for forgiveness. How can I atone for this sin? Now, I can only hope for your mercy."
Whatever the reason, the couple also embraced the widow, and the three of them cried together.

Twenty-eight Thousand Winds
Go-pan Saeng

(From beginning to end, the sound of radio waves buzzing in the wind)
Man "You ugly thing! Were you so greedy for Kim Chun-bae's diamond ring? What is money? What is a diamond? All we have is pure, unblemished love. Is that why you absolutely have to marry that pig-like Kim Chung-bae (金重培) to feel at peace?"
Woman "But my belly will be full."
Man "If having a full belly is your wish, let's run away together right now. Yi Su-il is also a confident, valiant man. Before two months are up, I'll make your belly swell up like a tadpole's!"
Woman "You need money to live."
Man "Don't worry. First, I'll deposit a million won in your name."
Woman "What - a million won?"
Man "Of course, a million won! I heard you can buy the diamond and pearl necklace worn by the Queen of the Netherlands for only two thousand won. I'll put it around your neck right away. I'll buy the Kumgang Mountains (金剛山) and build a Gashi Fortress (加시城), and build villas on each of the twelve thousand peaks!"
Woman "The countryside is lonely."
Man "If the countryside is lonely, we'll go to Paris, we'll go to New York."
Woman "I'll get seasick."
Man "If you get seasick, we'll take an airplane. If you don't like airplanes, I'll carry you on my back. Paris is nothing. New York is a goblin's den of Eros and gold. We'll buy the best hotel and the best villa. Today it's opera, tomorrow it's revue - a new, trendy, stylish dance party. Play as you like, spend as you like!"
Woman "I need to know English."
Man "If you don't know English, you can speak Korean."
Woman "Who will understand?"
Man "What's the worry? We'll establish temporary Korean language schools in America and France and teach them Korean in advance."
Woman "What about Mother?"
Man "If you miss Mother, she can come to Korea."
Woman "Without a house?"
Man "Why wouldn't we have a house? We'll level Samgaksan Mountain (三角山) and build a red-tiled cultural residence. I'll feed you pearl rice in a jade bowl on a lacquerware dining table with a grand piano, folding screen, perfume dressing table, and a hot bath. Two Lincoln cars, one for you and one for me!"
Woman "Separate, that's lonely."
Man "Let's take mine one day and yours the next. I'll always have white camellias you like blooming in the greenhouse. I'll pave the parlor floor with silver and gold coins and wallpaper the walls with hundred-won bills and bank bonds from around the world, okay?"
Woman "What if a thief breaks in?"
Man "What's so scary about a petty thief? I'll make loopholes in every door handle and load them with bullets. If a thief comes in, I'll riddle him with bullets before he can even get his feet in!"
Woman "I'll get hit first and die!"
Man "What ugly guy's bullet would hit its own owner?"
Woman "Hmph, I'm not going to eat."
Man "You ugly thing, are you that hungry? Don't worry. I'll build a building in the kitchen and have chefs from all over the world waiting in every room. British pot roast, American seolleongtang (설렁탕), German bean curd, Indian cold noodles, Brazilian seasoned dried fish, Manchurian jajangmyeon (짜장면). Eat whatever you want."
Woman "Oh, but I'm missing kimchi (김치)!"
Man "Oh, dear, your lifelong wish is scorched rice with kimchi (김치)!"<9>

A Crushed Pot
Lee Seo-gu

At the intersection of Jongno (鍾路), a streetcar and a car collided. A young lady, around eighteen or nineteen, with a face like a flower, was in the car. Because the car crashed and overturned, her tooth broke and her buttock was crushed into the shape of a tin pot. And that's not all. The streetcar driver stuck his nose into the young lady's crushed buttock and breathed heavily with his shoulders like a thick blanket. It was truly an unbelievable comedy. Onlookers gathered from all sides, unaware of the situation, and were shouting that the driver and the young lady were having a secret love affair. Under the bright May sunlight, the driver's grease-stained gloves and the young lady's enamel makeup case rolled around on the asphalt, igniting an untimely class struggle. However, the pawn ticket that flew out of the young lady's handbag and the savings passbook that rolled out of the driver's notebook were unfolding a rendezvous scene on a friendly street under the acacia shade.
Woman "Hmph, that's why money is good."
Man "That's not it. It turns out that the savings passbook and the young lady's pawn ticket were from the same printing shop, a first love from the old days."
Woman "Then how did the collision happen?"
Man "Hmph, do you want to know? It's amazing. When the car was about to cross the streetcar tracks, an old man rushed out from the other side in a hurry. So the car was surprised and suddenly turned the steering wheel! The streetcar pierced the car's fender."
Woman "Oh, why was the old man in such a hurry?"
Man "Hmph, his son is a troublemaker. His precious son came home drunk last night and said he had a headache, so he was going to apply for leave from the company when that happened."
Woman "Then why did the son drink so much?"
Man "It wasn't just that! The manager celebrated that his wife gave birth to their first son after ten years of marriage and they drank heavily, without even knowing what they were doing."
Woman "Oh, how amazing. So how did the manager's wife have her first son?"
Man "The manager's house has had a Western-style cook since last year, and that cook said that if you go to Onyang Hot Springs (溫陽溫泉), you'll definitely get pregnant. So the manager's wife went to the hot springs, and the heavens helped her and she got pregnant."
Woman "So who recommended the cook?"
Man "One of the manager's wife's classmates is the wife of a lawyer named Kim Ok-ju (金玉珠), and that wife's mother's younger sister introduced her as someone who cooks well, does laundry well, has good night vision, and is good at sleeping."
Woman "So why did the mother's younger sister go to the lawyer's house?"
Man "Hmph, there's another amazing story to that. The husband of that woman has recently been infatuated with a beauty in a cafe and is running wild all the time. So she was so upset that she went to the lawyer's wife to discuss divorce."
Woman "So what is the name of the cafe beauty?"
Man "Her nickname is Seomseom (섬섬), her official name is Kim Seong-nyeo (金成女), and the name of the cafe is 'Leigh Go' (레이고) or something."
Woman "So if it wasn't for Leigh Go (레이고), the young lady's buttock wouldn't have been crushed."
Man "Hmph, things turned out strangely. The young lady with the crushed buttock is Leigh Go (레이고) herself."

That Night
Wang Pyeong

Deep night! A wife waiting for her husband to come home:
Woman "I'm so upset I could die. He took the meager salary and spent it all at the bar, bringing home only 2 won (圓). Does he want the family to starve to death?"
Man "Didn't I bring 2 won (圓) so you wouldn't die... ..."
Woman "What?"
Man "Aish, why are you shouting so loud at this late hour? If a woman's voice goes outside the door, the family will be ruined. I worked hard for a month, so I should have a drink on payday."
Woman "There's a limit to drinking. Are you saying you'll spend a month's salary in one night?"
Man "Why would I spend it? I'll just eat it as is."
Woman "There's no food to make breakfast tomorrow! What am I going to do!"
Man "If there's no 'food', we'll eat Korean food (朝鮮料理)!"
Woman "I said there's nothing to cook!"
Man "If there's nothing to cook, we'll make porridge (죽)!"
Woman "I said there's no rice or porridge!"<10>
Man "If there's nothing, we'll buy seolleongtang (설렁탕)!"
Woman "Do they give seolleongtang (설렁탕) for free if you don't have money?"
Man "That's why there's something called 'credit' (外上), isn't there?"
Woman "Who would give us credit?"
Man "They'd give it to me."
Woman "Do you eat even if they don't give it?"
Man "If they don't give it, I'll just quit. Who am I afraid of?"
Woman "Aish, I'm foolish to believe in this useless man as my husband."
Man "Still, you're the only one being stubborn."
Woman "What am I going to do? There's nothing to eat for the whole month."
Man "We'll eat it all at once next month."
Woman "What? Are you saying we should starve for a month?"
Man "If you want to eat, you have to eat."
Woman "How do I eat?"
Man "Somehow, you have to eat."
Woman "Aish, I'm really going to die of hunger. I should leave this house. Where can't I live?"
Man "At 40, what do you think will happen if you leave? Don't say useless things. Flowers are good when they bloom, and women are good when they're young - go back and trust me."
Woman "Aish, why am I so old?" (cries)
Man "If you were young, would I do this again with my wife? Listen to me. Actually, I felt sorry that my wife was having a hard time, so I secretly built a twelve-room tile-roofed house (瓦家) under the Yoap willow tree, and I've also prepared rice sacks and servants, so don't worry about anything."
Woman "Oh, really? I didn't know. My husband is really something. But when did you build the house?"
Man "When was it?"
Woman "When did you do that?"
Man "Well-um-I built it in my dream the night before last."
Woman "What? Are you teasing me again?"
Man "Teasing? Are you a monkey that I'd tease? Wife, that's a joke - actually, I leased the Kim Seo-bang (金書房) house in Yoap, and I've been promoted from Small Officer (小使) to Employee (雇員) and will be working internally, so now my wife can say 'Come here!' and show off. What's wrong?"
Woman "Is that true? You've been promoted? So I'm a dignified lady now. When did that happen?"
Man "Well, this will probably happen in my dream tomorrow night."
Woman "What?"
Man "Wife, what good is it to just get angry in a difficult life at an old age? Let's live happily dreaming good dreams - haha."
Woman "Aish, there's nothing I can do."<11>

**Named Entities**

尹白南	Yun Baek-nam
金重培	Kim Chung-bae
金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
李瑞求	Yi Sŏ-gu
鍾路	Chongno
溫陽溫泉	Onyang Ŏnch'ŏn
金玉珠	Kim Ok-chu
金成女	Kim Sŏng-nyŏ
王平	Wang P’yŏng
金書房	Kim Sŏ-bang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제69호
발행일	1934년 01월 01일
기사제목	유모어 오케스트라, 漫談
기사형태	잡저

유모어 오케스트라, 漫談
목거리
尹白南

녀자는 허영의 화신이외다.
밤길을 다니지만 이하는 필자는 이런 밉살을 서슴지 안코 내놋는다. 그러나 어째떤 허영심이 만키는 남자보다 녀자이니 이 엄연한 사실이야 뉜들 어쩔수 잇스랴.
『여봐요...』
회사에서 사퇴해 도라온 남편의 얼골을 보자마자 지금 전보를 대여섯장이나 겁허바든 사람가티 허겁을 해서 남편을 부른다.
『왜 그리우』
『이걸좀 보서요. 초대ㅅ장이 왓다우』
그 초대ㅅ장에는 오는 XX날 야회를 열겟사오니 동부인하서서 래임하시기를 바란다는 뜻이 적혀 잇고 당시 사회에서 이름이 놉흔 모 실업가의 이름으로 서명이 되어잇다.
『여보 이런 긔회에 당신도 여러 명사들과 지면을 해두어야하오. 참 어쩌면 이런 조흔 찬쓰가 왓슬가 대관절 누가 우리를 소개햇슬가 고마운 일야... 그러나 난』
하고 XX자는 어엽분 얼골에 눈ㅅ살을 잡으리며 난처한 빗을 띄웟다.
『난 어째』
『옷은 한 벌 나들이 옷이 잇지만은 야회라면 명류부인들이 올텐데 목거리라도 하나 걸고가야지오. 그러치 안소.』
신혼한 지 얼마 아나되는 이 한쌍 부부는 련애결혼임에도 불구하고 잇다금 경제무제로 하야 족금한 다툼이 각금 이러나는 터이다. 그럴 때마닥 남편되는 위인의 가슴은 미상불찔-한적이 만은대 지금 또 『목거리』 말을 드르매 눈압히 일순간 캄캄해젓것다.
『그러타고 지금 별안간 안이 별안간이 안이라 우리 살님에 무슨 수로 『목거리』를 산단 말요.』
내외는 저녁밥 먹을 생각도 제처노코, 엇지하면 남에게 빠지지 안는 차림차림으로 야회에 참석할 수 잇슬가 하는 문제에 업는 지헤를 짜내여 본 결과 - 두 사람은 바로 이웃에 사는 OO부인을 차저갓다.
OO부인은 백만장자 미망인으로 『목거리』 가튼 것도 대엿섯개 잇는 것은 보앗스니까 렴치불고하고 하나 어더보려는 작정이엇다.
과연 OO부인은 동정을 햇다. 그래서 눈이 부신 따이아몬드 목거리 갑시 5만원이라는 것을 두말안코 빌려주엇다.
XX자는 그것을 빌어가지고 와서 일력(日曆)을 하로도 몃번씩 뒤집어 보며 야회ㅅ날이 오기를 기대렷다.
고대한던 야회날은 왓다.
내외는 의긔양양해서 그 연회에 참석하고 마시고 먹고 춤추기 시작햇다.
XX자는 깃분김에 먹지 못하는 술을 다량으로 마시고 정신이 오락가락하게 되고 나서야 비로소 부끄럽기도 해서 빨코니-로 찬바람을 쏘이러 나가서 그란간에 기대여 안잣다가 잠이 들엇다.
남편이 차자서 나온 때에는 XX자는 가느다란 코를 골고잇섯다.
『여보 이게 무슨 잠요. 창피하게』
XX자의 억개를 흔들며 남편은 나즈막히 꾸지젓다. 안해가 깜작놀내서 눈을 떳다.
『아 그런데 여보 목거리는 엇째ㅅ소.』
남편은 안해의 목에 목거리가 업는 것을 보고 놀내서 무럿다.
『네? 에구머니나 이게 웬일요』
XX자의 얼골은 금시에 새파라케 질리고 남편의 얼골은 침면조 뻔으로 야릇한 빗치 오르락 내리락 햇다. 다이아몬드 목거리는 확실히 도적마젓다.
내외는 망연자실해서 제집으로 도라왓다.
『이 일을 엇짜면 좃소』
『5만원-5만원- 아아 우리의 생활은 끗치 왓나보우』
내외는 밤이 깁도록 의론을 햇지만 별도리가 업섯다.
둘은 여간 보ㅅ잠을 싸가지고 그밤으로 고향을 도망해 나왓다.

십년이 지낫다.
비바람 치는 날 마츰 그날은 십년 전에야 회가 잇섯던 날 저녁이다.
락씨-를란 허푸수수한 남녀가 백만장자 미망인의 집 문압헤 서나렷다.

『누구신지 생각이 아니남니다.』
『그럴런지도 모르겟습니다. 십년전에 목거리를 비러간 채로 도망해간 내외올시다.』
『오-참 그럿습니다 그려... 그런대 어째 그밤으로 도망을 하섯드란말요.』
그 내외는 눈물과 함께 아래와 가튼 이야기를 시작햇습니다.
『그만 찬회ㅅ날 밤에 목거리를 도적 마젓습니다. 그러라고 무슨 염의로 이러버렷다고 하겟습니가. 물론 5만원을 보상할 돈은 업고... 내외가 의론한 결과 부부가 그 밤으로 이곳을 떠낫습니다. 그래서 오늘까지 십년동안을 먹는 것＜8＞ 입는 것을 절약해가며 일ㅅ단 그 돈을 갑흘 결심으로 모으고 모앗다는 것이 겨우 2만원 밧게 못됩니다. 5만원은 못되오나 우리의 성심에 용서하서서 우리의 죄를 더 책하지 마십시오.』
하며 가방속에서 2만원 돈을 내노앗다.
미망인은 돈과 내외를 격금내기로 물끄럼이 보고 잇더니 만은 고만 그 자리에 업대서 통곡을 하기 시작햇습니다.
『왜 이러십니까』
『안이오 내 죄를 용서해 주서요. 그 목거리는 5만원 가치가 잇는 것이 안이라 실상은 몃원 자리의 가ㅅ자 따이야올시다. 나의 족으마한 허영심이 그런 말을 엿줍지 안케해서 앗가운 청춘남녀의 금가티 귀한 십년세월을 허비케 한 일을 생각하니 내야 말로 당신 발아래 업대서 사죄해야만 올습니다. 나는 무엇으로 이 죄를 갑하야 올습니까. 인제는 나는 단신네 내외분이 처분만 바랄 수밧게 업습니다.』
어떠한 뜻이 엇던지 그 내외는 역시 미망인에게로 당녀들어서 세 사람이 서로 엉크러저서 통곡을 햇다합니다.

二十八萬風
孤帆生

(처음부터 끗까지 바람에 울니는 電波소리)
男 『이 못생긴 것아 김준의 금강석 반지가 그럿케도 탐이 나드냐! 돈이 머냐! 금강석이 무엇이냐 오직 우리에게는 순결무후한 사랑이 잇슬 뿐이다. 그래서 너는 긔어코 그 도야지 가튼 김중배 놈에게로 싀집을 가야 네 마음이 편하겟느냐』
女 『그럿치만 배는 부르지』
男 『배부르기가 소원이면 이 길로 나하고 다라나자 이수일이도 당당한 대장부이다. 두달이다 못가서 네 배가 올창이 배가티 불느게 해주마』
女 『돈이 잇서야 살지』
男 『걱정마라 위선 네 일흠으로 백만원만 저금을 해주마』
女 『머-백만원』
男 『암 백만원이지 화란녀왕의 목에 걸닌 금강석 진주목도리가 이천원만 주면 살수가 잇다드라. 당장에 네 목에다가 거러주마 금강산을 사가지고 가시성을 쌋코 일만 이천봉 봉이봉이 마다 별장을 지어주마』
女 『시골은 쓸쓸하지』
男 『시골이 쓸쓸하면 파리로 가지 뉴-욕으로 가지』
女 『배멀미나 하게가』
男 『배멀미가 나면 비행긔를 타고 비행긔가 실흐면 내가 업고 가마. 파리는 끗도 옵이다. 뉴-욕은 에로와 황금의 독개비판이다. 일등호텔 일등별장을 사가지고 오늘은 오폐라 내일은 례뷰-신 바람 나는 최신류행 멋드러진 무도회 네 멋대로 노라라 네 대로 써라』
女 『영어를 아라야지머-』
男 『영어를 못하면 조선말을 하지』
女 『누가 아라듯나』
男 『걱정이머냐 미국과 불란서에 림시조선 어학교를 세워가지고 조선말을 미리 가릇켜 두지』
女 『어머님은 엇더케하구』
男 『어머니가 그리우면 조선으로오지』
女 『집도 업시』
男 『왜 집이 업겟늬 삼각산을 꺽거서 평지를 맨들고 불근 긔와 문화주택을 지어주마. 그란드 피아노 평풍경대 향수목욕탕 피취옥소반에 진주공긔 금쌀밥을 먹게해주마 자가용 차동차는 링컨 두채 하나는 네 것 한아는 내 것!』
女 『따로따로라 쓸슬하게』
男 『하로는 내 것을 타고 하로는 네 것을 타자. 온실에는 항상 네가 조화하는 흰동백꼿을 피워 놋코 응접실에는 금전은전으로 완자를 트러서 장판을 깔고 벽에는 세게 각국 백원짜리 지페와 은행주권을 모와서 도배를 해주마 응』
女 『도적이 드러오면 엇더케하게』
男 『그까진 „적이 무에 무섬단 말이냐. 문고리마다 속사포 구녁을 내어노코 거긔다가 탄환을 재어두엇다가 도적놈만 드러오거든 발치 못나오게 해바리지』
女 『머 내가 몬저 마저죽게』
男 『어늬 못생긴 놈의 탄환이 제 주인을 맛치드냐』
女 『흥 먹지는 안나』
男 『이 못생긴 것아 먹는게 그러케 급하냐 걱정마라. 부엌에는 삘딍을 짓고 이방 저방에 세게각국 숙수들을 대령을 식혀 노흐마 영국 장조림 미국 설넝탄 독일 콩자반 인도 냉면 뿌라질 자반비웃 만주국 짜장면 무엇이든지 네 소원대로 차차 먹어라 응』
女 『아이그 그럿치만 김치가 빠젓네』
男 『아서 아서 평생소원이 누릉지에 김치꽁당이로구나』＜9＞

찌그러진 남비
李瑞求

종로 네 거리 한복판에서 뎐차하고 자동차하고 충돌이 낫습니다. 자동차에는 십팔구세 꼿가튼 자근 아씨가 탓다가 자동차가 깨저너머지는 바람에 이가 부러지고 볼기짝이 생철냄비 모양으로 쭉으러지고 마럿습니다. 또 그나 그뿐입니까. 전차운전수는 ·¸ 자근아씨의 죽으러진 볼기짝에 다가 코를 박고 둑겁이 모양으로 억개로 숨을 쉬고 잇습니다. 참으로 우슬 수 업는 희극이 올시다. 사면에서 모혀든 구경군들은 속도 모르고 운전수하고 자근아씨가 짝을 닌정사를 햇다고 왁을왁을 떠들고 잇습니다. 명랑한 오월 해빗아래에 기름때 무든 운전수의 장갑과 자근아씨의 에나 땔구쓰는 아스팔드 우에 어우러저 뒹굴며 때아닌 계급투쟁에 불이날지경입니다. 그러나 자근아씨의 핸드빽 속에서 날너나아온 시계전당표와 운정수의 수첩에서 굴너나아온 저금통장만은 아까시야 그늘 아래에서 사히조흔 거리의 런데부 풍경을 전개하고 잇습니다.
女 『흥 그러기에 돈이 조치요』
男 『그런게 안이야요. 알고보니 그 저금통장과 자근아씨의 전당표와는 가튼 인쇄소에서 탄생된 한녯날의 첫사랑이 엇드랍니다.』
女 『그런데 대관절 충돌은 엇재 낫습니까』
男 『흥 좀 아시럅니까. 긔가 맥히지요. 자동차가 전차길을 막가로 건느랴고 할 때에 저 편짝에서 왼 로인이 한분 허둥지둥 덤벼드럿습니다. 그래 자동차가 놀내서 급히 방향을 돌니는 통에 딱! 음향 뎐차가 자동차의 결창이를 꾀뚜럿답니다.』
女 『에그 그 로인은 왜 그리 허둥지둥 거럿슬까요』
男 『흥 자식이 애물이지요. 금지옥엽 가튼 망래아들이 어제밤에 술이 억병으로 취해드러와 머리가 압흐다고 알는고로 회사에 결근 신청을 하러가다가 그 모양이 되얏답니다』
女 『그런데 그 아들은 엇잿다고 그럿케 술을 먹엇슬까요』
男 『그런게 안이라 지배인의 집에서 장가든지 십년만에 겨오 첫아들을 낫다고 한턱을 톡툭이 내는 바람에 지각업시 닥치는 대로 드리 마섯드랍니다.』
女 『아이그 신통도 하지. 그럼 지배인 집에서는 첫아들은 엇더케 낫습니가』
男 『그런게 아니라 그 지배인 집에 작년부터 온 양서부억둑이를 하나 갓다 두엇는데 그 부엌둑이 말이 온양온천을 하면 반다시 애기를 밴다고 햇답니다. 그래 뜸을 해도 애기가 든다고 허설수로 지배인 부인이 온천에를 갓두랍니다. 그랫드니 하늘이 도와서 애기를 갓두랍니다』
女 『그럼 그 부엌둑이는 누가지시를 햇나요』
男 『그 부엌둑이는 지배인의 부인의 동창생중에 김옥주라는 변호사의 부인이 잇는데 그 부인의 동모의 아주머니 되는 이가 밥잘 짓고 빨내 잘하고 밤눈 밝고 잠귀 재다고 소개를 해서 갓다둔게 랍니다』
女 『그럼 그 동모의 아주머니는 엇재서 변호사 집에를 갓나요』
男 『흥 또 그것도 긔막힌 이야기가 잇서요. 그런게 아니라 그 부인네의 남편되시는 이가 요사히는 어는 카페 미인에게 바람이 나서 자나깨나 난봉만 피고단인대요. 그래서 하도 속이 상해서 리혼할 의론을 하랴고 변호사의 부인을 차저갓드랍니다』
女 『그럼 그 카페의 미인의 일흠은 무엇인가요』
男 『애명은 섬섬이라고 민적 일흠은 김성녀이라고 카페일흠은 「레이고」라든가요』
女 『그럼 그레이고만 안이 엇드면 자근아씨의 볼기짝은 쭉으러지지 안은 것을 그랫구려』
男 『흥 일이야 묘하게 되얏지요. 볼기짝 쭉으러진 자근아씨가 바로 「레이고」엇답니다』

그날 밤
王平

깁흔 밤! 남편 들어오기를 기대리고 잇든 안해가
女 『참속상해 죽겟네. 갓득이나 쥐꼬리만한 놈의 월급을 술집에다 다 갓다 밧치고 단돈 2원을 가저 왓스니 그래 집안 식구는 굶어 죽으란 말이요』
男 『죽지 말라고 2원이라도 가저오지 안엇나... ...』
女 『머엇째?』
男 『앗-다 깁흔 밤에 웨이리 목따는 소리를 해 여자의 소리가 문박을 나가면 집안이 망해-. 그래 한달동안 애써 일을 햇스니 월급밧는 날은 한잔 먹어야지』
女 『먹는 것도 분수가 잇지 그래 아무럿케도 한달 월급을 하롯저녁에 다까먹는 단 말이요』
男 『힘들며 웨 까먹어 그대로 먹지-』
女 『래일은 아츰지을 량식도 업스니 엇덕해!』
男 『「량식」이 업스면 朝鮮料理먹지』
女 『아 밥지을게 업단 말이예요』
男 『밥질게 업스면 죽쒀먹지』
女 『밥이고 죽이고 업단 말이예요』＜10＞
男 『다-업스면 설렁탕 사먹지』
女 『설넝탕은 돈업시 갓다줘요』
男 『그러니까 「외상」이라는게 잇지 안은가』
女 『멀보고 외상을 주어』
男 『날보고 주지』
女 『안줘도 먹어요?』
男 『안주면 그만두지 누가 겁나나』
女 『아이고 이 못난이를 남편이라고 밋는 이년이 어리석지』
男 『그래도 강짜는 혼자하면서』
女 『글세 이달 한달동안 먹을게 업스니 엇덕해요』
男 『오는 달에 한꺼번에 먹지』
女 『머요. 그럼 한달 동안을 굶으란 말이요』
男 『먹고 십흐면 먹어야지』
女 『엇더케 먹어요』
男 『좌우간 먹어야지』
女 『아이고 정말 애가 말너죽겟네. 내가 이놈의 집을 나가야지 어듸가면 못살가』
男 『나희 40에 나가면 머생길 줄아나 쓸대업는 소리야 꼿은 피엿슬 때고 여자는 젊엇슬 때라야 되-가서 나만 밋고 잇서』
女 『아이고 내가 웨늙엇슬까』(운다)
男 『젊엇스면 내가 또 이러케 하나 마누라 내말 들어보우 사실은 마누라 고생되는게 미안해서 마누라 몰내 요압 버드나무 밋헤다 열두간 瓦家를 지엇고 또 쌀가마니 나무바리도 준비해 두엇고 하인하녀도 다려 왓스니 아무걱정 말아』
女 『아이고 정말이요. 그런 줄 몰낫지 참 우리 영감이 영감이야. 그런데 집은 언제 지엇단 말요』
男 『그게 언제든가』
女 『언제 그럿케 햇슈』
男 『글세-응-그저게 밤 꿈에 지엿지-』
女 『머야 이게 또 사람을 놀려』
男 『놀리긴 머 당신이 원숭인가 놀리게-마누라 이건 농담이고-사실은 요압 金書房 네집을 전세로 엇엇고 내 벼슬도 小使에서 雇員으로 승격이 되어 內職으로 들어가게 되엿스니 이젠 마누라도 「이리오너라」하고 뽐낼텐데 멀그러우』
女 『그건 정말이요. 벼슬이 놉하젓단 말이지요. 그럼 나도 이제 에헵하고 당당하신 부인이시구만 그래그래 그건 언제부터 되엿단 말이요』
男 『글세 이건 암아 내일 밤 꿈에나 될껄-』
女 『머 엇재요』
男 『여보 마누라 어려운 살님 다 늙은 처지에 화만 내면 멋하오. 꿈이나 잘꾸면서 의좃케 살어갑시다- 하하』
女 『아이그 할 수 업구려-』＜11＞
＜8-11＞