別건곤 第69號
1934년 01월 01일
秘中秘話, 百人百話集 (Secret Stories, Collection of a Hundred People's Tales)
多言生
소식 (News)

Lee Sang-jae
Years ago, the late Lee Sang-jae, although a devout Christian, did not abstain from smoking like other Christians. He always smoked a long pipe at home. When a certain Christian asked, "Teacher, do Christians also smoke?" he smiled and said, "When did Jesus say not to smoke? There was no tobacco in Jesus' time, but if there had been tobacco then, that benevolent man would surely have said, 'Let us old people smoke a few pipes when we are bored.'" The questioner also laughed.

Yeo Gyu-hyeong
Ha Jeong (荷汀) Yeo Gyu-hyeong is only known as a great master of Chinese literature, but he was a talented person in various fields of Chinese studies. He was a fast calligrapher, of course, and a master of Go. He was also a master of various games such as Janggi (Korean chess), Sutujeon (gambling game), and Golpae (Korean dominoes). He had more than the average knowledge of mathematics, music (especially the Yanggeum), and painting, but he secretly drew paintings and never showed them to the world. Only a folding screen in his house was known to be his work.

Lee Gap
His real name was Lee Hui-seon (李徽善). Because he falsified his age and passed the Jinsa (進士) examination in the year of Gapsul (甲戌科), he had all his property confiscated by Min Yeong-hwi (閔泳徽), the governor of Pyeongan Province, as a pretext. Afterward, he wandered to China and Japan, graduated from a Japanese military academy, and returned to Korea during the Russo-Japanese War, becoming a commander (參領) and regaining all his property from Min. This is a well-known fact. However, even before he went abroad, he went to great lengths to take Min's property. When Min was the magistrate of Chuncheon (春川留守), he walked from his hometown of Sukcheon (肅川) in Pyeongan Province to Chuncheon, developed a foot disease, and stayed at his maternal relatives, the Cha family (外族車氏), in Chuncheon. He negotiated with Min several times to get the money, but he failed and went abroad.

Yu Gil-jun
The first Korean to write a book on Korean-Chinese grammar (朝漢文) was Gu-dang Yu Gil-jun (矩堂俞吉濬). After studying in Europe, he wrote the famous "Observations on Travels in the West" (西遊見聞記).

Min Yeong-ik's Autograph
At the end of Gahoe-dong, on the rock wall of the Yaksu spring in Chwiunjeong (聚雲停), there are four letters, "Cheongnin Dongcheon" (靑麟洞天), and a line, "The land is remote, and the mountain's intention is ancient; the spring is clear, and the stone's energy is new" (地僻山意古, 泉淸石氣新). I was always curious as to whose handwriting it was, but I heard from an old man that it was the autograph of Pyojeong Min Yeong-ik (杓亭閔泳翊), who was powerful and famous for his calligraphy and painting in modern Korea.

Seong Sam-mun's Hand-Planted Pine
In the empty lot behind the Bokju well in Hwadong (花洞), behind the Sokchung stele, there is a large rectangular stone (長石) lying down. On the stone, the six letters "Seong Seonsaeng Susiksong" (成先生手植松 - Seong Sam-mun's Hand-Planted Pine) are clearly carved. According to the people of the village, the site was originally the site of Seong Sam-mun's house, and until decades ago, there was an old pine tree he had planted. The stone was erected to mark it, but now the pine tree has died and only the stone remains. However, recently, someone is building a house on the site and has removed the stone, so it cannot be seen.

Eo Yun-jung and Eo Sal-hyeon
During the Eulmi Incident (乙未事變), Eo Yun-jung fled to his hometown of Yongin (龍仁) in a palanquin. As he was going over a hill, he asked the palanquin bearers what the name of the hill was. The bearers replied that it was Eo Sal-hyeon (魚殺峴 - Fish Killing Pass). Yun-jung was greatly shocked to hear this and said, "My surname is Eo (魚), so Eo Sal-hyeon is very ominous." He got out of the palanquin and sat down for a long time as if he had lost his soul. As soon as he finished speaking, some ignorant farmers who were farming nearby recognized him as Eo Yun-jung, conspired, came and killed him indiscriminately. This is similar to the death of Bongchu Seonsaeng Pang Tong (鳳雛先生龐統) of the old Shu Han (蜀漢) at Nakbongpa (落鳳坡).

Woo Beom-seon
Woo Beom-seon was a man of unusual talent, so he had many unusual ideas. He always said that Korea was too small, so in order to think about the long-term future of the nation, everyone should consider annexing Manchuria (滿洲). When he went into exile in Japan and changed his name, he specifically used the name Bukya Ilpyeong (北野一平 - Northern Field One Peace), meaning that he would flatten the Manchurian plains of the north. At that time, no one in the East or West could even dream of where Manchuria was attached, but seeing that he was already thinking about the Manchurian problem at that time, one can guess how broad and grand his insight and ambition were.

Yang Geun-hwan and Eom Sin-deok
Eom Sin-deok (嚴信德), the widow of Min Won-sik (閔元植 未亡人嚴信德), who was the proponent of so-called New Japanism (新日本主義) and was assassinated by Yang Geun-hwan at the Tokyo Station Hotel more than ten years ago, suddenly had a change in her complexion when she saw the news that Yang Geun-hwan was being paroled last year. She barely recovered after a few hours, and since then, her health has been consistently poor. Whatever the reason for his death, the conjugal affection and resentment will never be forgotten.

Hong Myeong-hui and Chosun Ilbo
In the old Chosun Ilbo days, Hong Myeong-hui's younger brother, Hong Seung-hui, and his son, Gi-mun, were both in that position, but these days, Hong Myeong-hui is writing "Im Kkeok-jeongjeon" (林巨正傳) and receives a preferential payment of 100 won per month, and Gi-mun is also the head of the investigation department and has a considerable income. Hong and Chosun Ilbo seem to have a deep relationship.

Ju Yo-han
Ju Yo-han, who has been a giant in the newspaper and magazine world for many years, is now working at Hwashin Department Store (和信百貨店). His diverse talents are truly like a department store, but rumors say that the Dong-A Ilbo is secretly sending him overtures to recruit him again. Is it true?

Lee Gwang-su
His pen name is Chunwon (春園), so he is gentle and amiable, and he is the most affable and charming of all writers. However, he is as passionate about regionalism (地方熱) as anyone else. According to someone, when An Do-san (安島山) was arrested and escorted, other newspapers had huge articles and photos of him, but for some reason, only the Chosun Ilbo did not publish the article that day. He was lying in bed when he saw the newspaper, and he jumped up, clenched his fists, and shouted, "An Chang-ho is from Pyeongan Province, that's why! If he were from Giho, it wouldn't have happened..." He became extremely heated and made a fuss for a while, but his wife and friends calmed him down and comforted him. It is said that he was finally stabilized. Was his heat at that time a fever caused by illness, or was it really regionalism?

Kim Hyeong-won and Oh Bong-min
Kim Hyeong-won of the Chosun Ilbo and Oh Bong-min, the owner of the Chosun Art Museum (朝鮮美術館主), were so close in middle school that their classmates even teased them as husband and wife. However, after Kim became the editor-in-chief of the Chosun Ilbo, a jobless friend saw Oh and said, "Hey, your wife has become the editor-in-chief of the Chosun Ilbo, so you should start a journalist movement." Everyone who heard this laughed.

Jeong Dae-hyeon and Im Geung-sun
Jeong Dae-hyeon, the former principal of Boseong High School, and Im Geung-sun of Dongil Bank (東銀) were also very close friends in Tokyo during their student days, like the two Oh and Kim mentioned above. So even now, when Jeong meets Im, he asks, "Is your wife doing well?" and Im replies, "Is your old man doing well?" and they laugh together. Just a piece of that interesting story-.

Min Dae-sik and His Son and the Atmosphere
I don't know if he is a frugal person or a miser, but Min Dae-sik, who is famous for not spending money well, recently had a grandson (孫子). His friends kept badgering him to throw a party, but he wouldn't listen. Finally, they dragged him into a Seolleongtang (ox bone soup) restaurant. However, when he was paying the bill, he only paid for what he ate, so the others clicked their tongues and only said, "He's stingy," and didn't even try to talk to him again.
Some time later, the rumor reached the ears of Min Yeong-hwi (閔泳徽), who felt sorry about it, so he secretly called Min Byeong-su (閔丙壽 - Dae-sik's son) and said, "Hey, your father was stingy, so how can we save face? No matter how much money it costs, you should throw a party in place of your father." Byeong-su, who liked to play, said, "Oh, well, I'm screwed," and invited the bank staff and other friends and spent several hundred won to throw a good party. The atmosphere of that family is like an hourglass.

Kim Seong-su and Mun Il-pyeong
Kim Seong-su is relatively clean when it comes to women <19>, but he had a secret romance during his student days in Tokyo. When he was staying at a boarding house with Mun Il-pyeong, the landlady's daughter was quite pretty, and Mun was interested in her. Kim sensed this and preempted him by stealing the woman's love first, and Mun eventually failed and Kim won. So even now, when Mun meets Kim at a gathering, he complains about it and laughs.

Yang Won-mo and His Wife
Yang Won-mo of the Dong-A Ilbo is married to Byeon Yeong-ae (卞榮愛). However, the sound of Yeong-ae is coincidentally similar to Yeong-ae (令愛 - beloved daughter), so a witty friend said to Yang Won-mo, "Hey, you live with Yeong-ae, so it's like living with your daughter." The people next to him burst into laughter. Listening to the words, it seemed like that.

Choe Nam-seon and Jeong In-bo
Choe Nam-seon and Jeong In-bo were originally very close, but after Choe became an editor and started receiving a salary, they sent each other letters of severance and did not associate with each other. For some reason, they have reconciled and are now as close as before. It seems that personal relationships are gradually turning into international relationships.

Gwon Deok-gyu
He used to broadcast Korean language lectures on the radio, but one day he did not broadcast Korean language and instead broadcast English (英語) that the general public could not understand, which made the listeners wonder. However, in reality, it wasn't English broadcasting. Because he was a heavy drinker, his tongue was twisted from drinking while broadcasting, so he broadcast Korean words like English - truly a double broadcast (二重放送).

Kim Jin-gu and Yun Baek-nam
Kim Jin-gu and Yun Baek-nam are well-known storytellers. Kim Jin-gu told so many stories about Kim Ok-gyun (金玉均) that he said he could see Kim Ok-gyun clearly even with his eyes closed. Yun Baek-nam has been repeating the stories of the Yeonsan period (燕山朝) for so long. It would be easy for him to see Yeonsan-ju too.

Bang Jeong-hwan and Ryu Gwang-ryeol
The late Bang Jeong-hwan and Ryu Gwang-ryeol were not only the same age but also had similar personalities, so they were very close. After Bang passed away, Ryu was greatly shocked and lamented the impermanence of life. He broke his belief that he would remain single for a while and hurriedly got married. Every time he did something, he thought of Bang and felt that his current survival was an extra life compared to Bang. He confessed at a certain meeting that he had a lot of ideas that he didn't have to worry too much about his body.

Bang Eung-mo
Bang Eung-mo is now a dignified <20> president of the Chosun Ilbo, with Lee Gwang-su, Seo Chun, and other celebrities under his command, but a few years before he became a successful businessman, when he was managing the Jeongju branch of the Dong-A Ilbo, he was frequently suspended from publishing the newspaper because he could not pay the newspaper bills, and he was severely scolded at the head office. He said that taking away the key figures of that company at the beginning of his acquisition of the Chosun Ilbo was his first act of revenge. Whether it was really revenge or not is unknown, but he must have felt secretly thrilled when he brought Lee Gwang-su, whom he had admired and served as the editor-in-chief of the head office, back as his subordinate.

Park Hui-do
Because he is so big, he also eats a lot. He usually eats two bowls of Seolleongtang for lunch and six or seven servings of Sukiyaki.

Song Jin-woo
So many people have been talking about his lack of a beard that he secretly applied some medicine, and now a few strands have grown like grass in the desert. If he protects them well, he will have dozens by the time he is sixty.

Lee Yun-jae
Lee Yu-jae, who is always known for his pedestrianism (徒步主義) and not wearing an overcoat even in winter, wears unusual gloves instead. Because he is busy, he is careless, so he sometimes wears the gloves backward and goes to school to teach, which makes the students laugh.

Lee Geuk-ro
Dr. Lee Geuk-ro always wears rubber shoes, as if saying that Korea's new economic policy starts with rubber shoes. However, that policy has not yet been controlled, so his wife still wears leather shoes.

Dokgo Seon and Sagong Hwan
Dokgo Seon of Joongdong High School and Sagong Hwan of Gyeongseong Nursery School all have compound surnames (複姓). However, the students who enter the school for the first time do not know that their surnames are compound, so they call Dokgo Seon "Teacher Dok" (왈독선생) and Sagong Hwan "Teacher Sa" (왈사선생), which often makes the other teachers laugh.

Yun Chi-ho and Park Seung-bin
Yun Chi-ho takes his entire family to a Western-style restaurant every Saturday, and Park Seung-bin has a meatless day every Thursday, so his entire family eats simple meals. That's something only rich people can do!

Jeong Chil-seong
Since he has nothing to do after the Geunwoo Society (槿友會) was dissolved, he spends his time knitting and embroidering. Is he converting to socialism (絲繪主義) from now on?

Virgin Ja-hye and Madam Ja-hye
Kim Ja-hye of the Shindonga company and Kim Ja-hye of Geunhwa School have the exact same name, so sometimes people ask Kim Ja-hye of Shindonga about Kim Mi-risa and the news of Geunhwa Girls' School, and they ask Kim Ja-hye of Geunhwa about the new family of Shindonga. Not only that, but sometimes hopeless men who are secretly in love with the virgin Kim Ja-hye of Shindonga send love letters to the already married Kim Ja-hye of Geunhwa.

Lee Gap-su and Lee Gap-su
The two have similar names and are both doctors, so it is easy to confuse them and misunderstand. One funny example is that last year, Lee Gap-su held a wedding reception at the Chosun Hotel, and many unexpected guests came, which he found very strange. He later found out that many people had come because they mistook Lee Gap-su for Lee Gap-su.

Kim Gi-jeon
Kim Gi-jeon, who has been receiving treatment at the Haeju Sanatorium (海州療養院) for many years due to his faith, has recently made very good progress, and if he continues to improve smoothly, he will recover in the spring or summer of this year. One thing to be grateful for is that the hospital has not only been treating him free of charge so far, but has also built a special room for him in a clean coastal area and will continue to provide free treatment until he is discharged.

Lee Dun-hwa
Children call him Mr. Copper-ware. It is not that he farts well and earned that nickname, but because when he talks to children, he tells the story of the copper-ware ghost in the old days, "Is it copper-ware? Is it copper-ware?... ...", he earned that nickname.

Choe Seon-ik
He has the nickname of vice president of the baby in his company. It's not about his personality, but it means that he is still inexperienced in newspaper management and young compared to the vice presidents of each company, such as Lee Sang-hyeop of Maeil, Jang Deok-su of Donga, and Lee Gwang-su of Chosun. <21>

**Named Entities**

李商在	Lee Sang-jae
荷汀 呂圭亨	Ha Jeong Yeo Gyu-hyeong
李徽善	Lee Hui-seon
甲戌科	Gapsul-kwa
閔泳徽	Min Yeong-hwi
平安監司	Pyeongan-gamsa
肅川	Sukcheon
春川留守	Chuncheon-ryusu
外族車氏	Oejok Chassi
矩堂 俞吉濬	Gu-dang Yu Gil-jun
朝漢文	Cho Hanmun
西遊見聞記	Sŏyu Kyŏnmunki
聚雲停	Chwiunjeong
靑麟洞天	Ch'ŏngnin Tongch'ŏn
地僻山意古, 泉淸石氣新	Chip'yŏk sanŭigo, ch'ŏnch'ŏng sŏkki sin
杓亭 閔泳翊	Pyojeong Min Yŏng-ik
花洞	Hwadong
成先生手植松	Sŏng Sŏnsaeng Susiksong
成三問	Sŏng Sammun
乙未事變	Ŭlmi Sabŭn
龍仁	Yongin
魚殺峴	Ŏsalhyŏn
鳳雛先生龐統	Pongch'u Sŏnsaeng P'ang T'ong
蜀漢	Shuk Han
落鳳坡	Nakpongp'a
禹範善	U Pŏmsŏn
滿洲	Manju
北野一平	Pugya Ilp'yŏng
新日本主義	Sinilponjuŭi
閔元植	Min Wŏnsik
未亡人嚴信德	Miwang'in Ŏm Sindŏk
楊槿煥	Yang Kŭnhwan
東京	Tōkyō
朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
林巨正傳	Im Kkŏkjŏngjŏn
洪命熹	Hong Myŏnghŭi
洪承熹	Hong Sŭnghŭi
起文	Kimmun
朱耀翰	Chu Yohan
和信百貨店	Hwashin Paekhwajŏm
安島山	An Dosan
安昌浩	An Ch'angho
金炯元	Kim Hyŏngwŏn
吳鳳彬	O Pongbin
朝鮮美術館	Chosŏn Misulgwan
鄭大鉉	Chŏng Taehyŏn
任兢淳	Im Kŭngsun
東銀	Tong'ŭn
閔大植	Min Taesik
閔泳徽	Min Yŏnghwi
閔丙壽	Min Pyŏngsu
金性洙	Kim Sŏngsu
文一平	Mun Ilp'yŏng
梁源模	Yang Wŏnmo
卞榮愛	Pyŏn Yŏng'ae
崔南善	Ch'oe Namsŏn
鄭寅普	Chŏng Inbo
權悳奎	Kwŏn Tŏkkyu
金振九	Kim Jingu
尹白南	Yun Paengnam
金玉均	Kim Okyun
燕山朝	Yŏnsanjo
方定煥	Pang Chŏnghwan
柳光烈	Ryu Kwangryŏl
方應模	Pang Ŭngmo
李光洙	Lee Gwangsu
徐椿	Seo Chun
朴熙道	Pak Hŭido
宋鎭禹	Song Jinwoo
李允宰	Lee Yunjae
李克魯	Lee Keukro
獨孤璇	Dokgo Seon
司空桓	Sagong Hwan
尹致昊	Yun Ch'iho
朴勝彬	Pak Sŭngbin
丁七星	Chŏng Ch'ilssŏng
金慈惠	Kim Chahye
申東亞	Shindonga
金美理紗	Kim Mirisa
近華女子學校	Kŭnhwa Yŏjahakkyo
李甲秀	Lee Gap-su
李甲洙	Lee Gap-su
金起田	Kim Gijeon
海州療養院	Haeju Ryoyangwŏn
李敦化	Lee Tunhwa
崔善益	Choe Seon-ik
李相協	Lee Sanghyeop
張德秀	Chang Deoksu
每日申報	Maeil Sinbo
東亞日報	Tonga Ilbo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제69호
발행일	1934년 01월 01일
기사제목	秘中秘話, 百人百話集
필자	多言生
기사형태	소식

秘中秘話, 百人百話集
						多言生
李商在
년전에 작고한 이상재씨는 예수교인으로는 물론 찰예수교인이지만은 다른 교인들 모양으로 금연(禁煙)을 하지 안코 집에 잇슬 때에 항상 장죽에 입담배를 피웟는대 어떤 교인이 질문 비슷하게 뭇기를 선생님 리교인도 담배를 먹습니까 하니까 그는 싱긋이 우스며 하는 말이 예수씨가 언제 담배먹지 말나고 말슴하엿소. 예수시대에는 담배가 업섯기에 그럿치 만일 그때에 담배가 잇섯다면 그 박애하시는 양반이 반듯이 말슴하시기를 우리가타 늙은 사람들은 심심한 때에 몃대식 먹으라고 말슴하섯슬 것이라고 하야 그 뭇던 사람도 또한 일소를 하얏다고 한다.

呂圭亨
하정(荷汀) 려규형씨는 세상 사람들이 다만 한문대가(漢文大家)로 만 아지 만은 그는 한학이 외각방면으로 다재다능한 분이다. 글씨도 물론 잘쓰는데 속필이요. 바둑도 농수요 그 외장긔 수투전 골패 등 어느 잡긔에 명수안 인 것이 업고 數學 풍류(특히 양금) 그림도 보통사람 이상의 조예(造詣)가 잇는데 특히 그림은 남모르게 혼자 그려서 세상에 전한 것이 한폭도 업고 자긔집에 병풍한 채를 그려서 전해들 뿐이엿다.

李甲
그의 본명은 이희선(李徽善)이 다 갑술과(甲戌科)에 나히를 속이고 진사(進士)한 까닭으로 민영휘(閔泳徽) 평안감사 때에 그 죄를 구실삼아 전 재산을 다 빼앗기고 그 뒤 중국으로 또는 일본으로 방낭하다가 일본사관학교를 졸업하고 일로전쟁때에 귀국하야 일략 참영(參領)이 되여 민씨에게 그 재산을 다 찻게 된 것은 세상사람이 다 아는 사실이지만은 그가 외국에 가기 이전에도 민씨에게 재산을 차지랴고 엇지애를 섯던지 민씨 춘천류수(春川留守) 시대에 그의 고향인 평안도 숙천(肅川)에서 춘천까지 도보로 거러갓섯는데 발병이나서 춘천에 잇는 그의 외족 차씨(外族車氏)의 집에 누어 잇스면서 그 돈을 차지랴고 민씨에게 여러번 교섭하다가 그만 실패를 하고 그길로 외국으로 갓섯다고 한다.

兪吉濬
조선사람으로 조한문(朝漢文) 교요의 저서(著書)를 처음 한 분은 구당유길준(矩堂兪吉濬)이니 그가 구주에 류학하고 도라온 후 력작한 유명한 서유긔견문긔(西遊見聞記)란 것이 그것이다.

閔永翊遺筆
가희동막바지 취운정(聚雲停) 약수터의 석벽에 청린동천(靑麟洞天) 네글자와 『地僻山意古, 泉淸石氣新』이란 글 한 귀를 색인 것이 잇는데 그것이 누구의 필적인지 알지 못하야 항상 궁금하얏더니 어떤 로인에게 드른즉 근대 조선청게에서 세력이 당당하고 서화로 유명하던 표정민영익(杓亭閔泳翊)의 유필이라고 한다.

成三問手植松
화동(花洞) 복주 우물 뒷골-속충비각뒤라고 하는 빈터에는 큰 장석(長石)이 한 개 누어잇고 그 장석에는 성선생수식송(成先生手植松) 이란 여섯자가 뚜렷이 색여잇다. 그 동리사람의 말을 드르면 그터는 원래 성삼문(成三問) 선생의 집터로 몃십년 전가지도 그의 수식한 노송이 잇섯고 그돌은 그것을 표시하기 위하야 세윗던 것인데 지금은 소나무도 죽어업서지고 몰만남어 잇다고 한다. 그런데 요새에는 그 터에 누가 집을 짓노라고 돌까지 엇다치워 버려서 볼 수가 업게 되엿다.

魚允中과 魚殺峴
을미사변(乙未事變) 때에 어윤중이 부인라는 교군을 타고 자긔 고향인 륭인(龍仁)으로 도망을 하얏는데 한고개를 넘어가다가 교균 꾼더러 뭇기를 이 고개가 무슨 고개냐 한즉 교군꾼이 대답하되 어살이 고개라고 하얏다. 윤중은 그 말을 듯고 대경실색하야＜18＞ 왈 내성(姓)이 어가인데 어살이고개(魚殺峴)면 대단이 불길한다 하고 교군에 나려서 한참 동안 넉을 일은 듯이 안젓더니 그말이 끗나자 그 근처에서 농사하던 무지란민이 그가 어윤중인 줄 알고 작당하야와서 함부로 란타하야 죽엿다. 그것은 맛치 녯날 촉한(蜀漢)의 봉추선생방통(鳳雛先生龐統)이 낙봉파(落鳳坡)에서 죽은 것과 사실이 비슷하다.

禹範善
우범선은 인물이 긔물이니 만치 생각도 엉둥한 생각이 만엇섯다. 그는 항상 말하기를 조선은 너무도 국토가 협착하니까 장래 국가백년의 대게를 생각한다면 누구나 만주(滿洲)까지 병란할 생각을 두지 안으면 안된다 하고 일본에 망명하야 변성명을 할 때에도 그는 특히 북야일평(北野一平)이라 하얏스니 즉 북방의 만주벌을 한 번 토평하겟다는 의미다. 그때 동서양 사람중 누구나 물론하고 만주가 어듸가 붓턴는지 굼도 못꾸던 그 당시에 그가 벌서 그러케 만주문제를 생각한 것을 보면 그 얼마나 식견과 포부가 고윌 웅대하얏던 것을 짐작할 수 잇다.

梁槿煥과 嚴信德
소위 신일본주의(新日本主義)의 주창자로 십여년 전에 동경역 호텔에서 양근환에게 자살을 당한 민원식의 미망인 엄신덕(閔元植 未亡人嚴信德)은 작년에 양근환의 가출옥(假出獄) 한다는 신문을 보고는 별안간 긔색을 하얏다가 몃시간 만에 겨우 회생하얏는데 그 뒤부터는 몸이 항상 불건하다고 한다. 일이야 무슨 일에 죽엇던지 부부간정의와 멧처진 한은 항상 잇처지지 안을 것이다.

洪命熹와 朝鮮日報
전날 조선일보 시대에는 홍명희씨의 아우 홍승희씨와 그의 아들 긔문(起文)군이 숙질이 가티 그 자리에 잇더니 요새는 홍명희씨가 임꺽정(林巨正)전을 쓰고 매삭 일백원이란 우대의 고료를 밧고 긔문군은 또 조사부장으로 잇서서 수입이 상당하다. 홍씨와 조선일보는 피차에 무슨 인연이 깁흔 듯.

朱耀翰
다년간 신문 잡지게에 거장으로 잇던 주요한씨는 화신백화점(和信百貨店)의 일을 보게 되엿다. 그의 다방면 긔농은 그야말로 백화점이지만은 풍문에 드르면 동아일보에서 다시 그를 모서가랴고 암암중 추파를 보낸다고 하니 과연인지!

李光洙
그는 호가 춘원(春園)이니 만큼 성질이 온순유화하야 문인 중으로 제일 원만하고 아양이 잇는 분이다. 그러나 지방렬(地方熱)만은 남만큼 잇는이니 어떤 이의 하는 말을 드르면 전에 안도산(安島山)이 체포 호송되야 올때에 다른 신문에는 그의 긔사와 사진이 굉장하게 낫스되 유독 조선일보만은 무슨 사정으로 그날에 밋처 그 긔사를 내지 안엇더니 그가 병석에 누엇다가 그 신문을 보고는 벌덕 일어나서 주먹을 부르쥐고 고함을 치되 안창호가 평안도 사람이기에 그러하지 긔호사람가트면 그러할 리가 업다고... 하며 열이 극도에 올나 한참 야단을 치다가 그의 부인과 친구가 말리고 위로하야 겨우 안정되엿다 한다. 그의 그때 그열이 병으로 생긴 신열인지 과연 지방열인지!

金炯元과 吳鳳彬
조선일보 김형원씨와 조선미술관주(朝鮮美術館主) 오봉민씨와는 중학시대에 남유달이 갓찹게 지냇기 때문에 동모학생들이 그들을 부부라고까지 조롱한 일이 잇섯다. 그런대 이번에 김씨가 조선일보의 편즙국장이 된 뒤로 어떤 실업슨 친구가 오씨를 보고 하는 말이 여보 당신부인이 조선일보 편즙국장이 되얏다니 긔자운동이나 한아하십니다하고 조롱옳하야 뭇는 사람들이 모도 우섯다고 한다.

鄭大鉉과 任兢淳
전날 보성고보교장 정대현씨와 동일은행(東銀)의 임긍순씨도 동경류학시대에 우에 말한 오김(吳金) 량씨와 가튼 관게로 친분이 매우 두터운 분이다. 그리하야 지금까지도 정씨가 임씨를 만나서 마누라 잘잇섯나 하면 임씨는 또 영감 잘잇섯소하고 파하여 웃는다고 한다. 그 역자미잇는 이야기의 한쪼각-.

閔大植父子와 風情
절약가라 할지 이나색가라 할지 그것은 모르겟스나 돈 잘쓰지 안키로 유명한 민대식씨는 얼마전에는 손자(孫子)를 보왓는데 친구들이 한턱 내라고 암만 졸나도 듯지를 안으니까. 최후에 그를 끌고 어떤 설넝탕집으로 드러갓섯다. 그러나 그것도 회게를 하고 나올 때에 자긔 먹은 것만 내고 나오니 다른 사람들이 모도 혀를 두르며 지독야라 소리만하고 다시 말도 건너보지 못하얏섯다.
그런지 얼마 후에 그 소문이 민영휘(閔泳徽)씨 귀에 드러가매 그 역 미안하게 생각하얏던지 민병수(閔丙壽-大植氏子)군을 슬몃이 불너가지고 애야 네 아비가 약차약차 하얏다니 체면에 엇지 되엿니 돈이야 얼마들던지 아비대신으로 네가 한턱을 내라 하엿더니 례의 놀기조와하는 병수군은 에-라좃탓구나 하고 은행사람 긔타 여러친구들을 청하야 수삼백원을 드려 한턱을 잘 냇다고 한다. 그 집풍정은 말하자면 장구통 풍정이라 할가.

金性洙와 文一平
김성수씨가 녀자에 대해서＜19＞는 비교적 깨끗한 편이지 만은 동경류학시대에는 남모르는 염화(艶話)가 잇섯다. 그가 문일평씨와 어떤 하숙에 가티 잇슬 때에 그 집주인의 딸이 상당이 입버서 문시가 눈독을 드리고 잇섯는대 김씨가 끠 색을 알고 중간횡령으로 먼저 그 녀자의 사랑을 빼서서 결국 문씨가 실패를 하고 김씨가 승리를 하게 되얏다. 그리하야 지금까지도 문씨가 주석가튼데서 김씨를 만나면 그때 그불평을 말하고 웃는다고.

梁源模와 그 夫人
동아일보 양원모씨의 부인은 변영애(卞榮愛)씨다. 그런데 영애의 음이 공교이 영애(令愛)와 비슷함으로 어떤 화담 조와하는 친구가 양원모씨를 보고 여보 당신은 영애를 다리고 사니 딸을 다리고 사는 셈인 안이요 하야 엽헤 잇던 사람들이 박장대소를 하얏다 한다. 말을 듯고 보니 그것도 그러할뜻.

崔南善과 鄭寅普
최남선과 정인보 량씨는 원래 교분이 자별하다가 최씨가 편이 안저 월급을 타게 된 뒤에 절교문가지 보내고 피차상종을 하지 안터니 엇지 된 셈인지 요새는 다시 복교(復校)가 되야 전과 가티 갓찹게 상종을 한다 개인교제도 점차 국제 교제로 화하는 모양.

權悳奎
그는 요전에 방송국에서 조선어 강좌를 연속방송하는대 어떤 날에는 조선어 방송을 하지안코 일반이 잘 알어드를 수 업는 영어(英語)방송을 하야 듯는 사람들이 모도 이상하게 녁엿섯다. 그러나 실상은 영어방송이 안이라 술잘자시는 그가 취중에 방송을 하노라고 혀가 꼬부라저서 조선말을 영어와 가티 방송하엿다고-그야말로 이중방송(二重放送).

金振九와 尹白南
김진구와 윤백남 량씨는 누구나 다 아는 야담대가다. 그런데 김진구씨는 김옥균(金玉均) 이야기를 엇지나 만히 하얏던지 눈을 감어도 김옥균이가 환이 보니다고 하더니 윤백남씨는 연산조(燕山朝) 이야기를 또 그러케 오래두고 복습을 한다. 그의 눈에도 아마 연산주가 뵈기 쉬울걸.

方定煥과 柳光烈
작고한 방정환시와 류광렬씨는 나가 동갑일 뿐 아니라 심긔가 서로 상통하야 평소 여타 자별하게 지냇섯는데 방씨가 작고한 뒤로는 류씨도 정신상 큰 충동을 바더서 인생의 무상한 것을 한탄하고 얼마동안 독신생활하랴던 그 신조도 깨트리고 급급히 결혼을 하고 무슨일을 할 때마다 발군을 생각하며 자긔의 현재 생존한 것은 방군에 비하면 레외로 더사는 것이니 육신을 위하야 그다지 걱정할 것이 업다는 관념이 만히 생기게 된다고 그는 어느 좌석에서 고백...

方應模
방응모씨가 지금은 당당한＜20＞ 조선일보 시장으로 이광수
서춘 외 여러 명사들을 자긔 부하에 두고 행호 시령을 하지만은 성금가가 되기 이전 몃해전에 동아일보 정주지국을 경영할 때에는 신문대금을 못내여 신문정지를 각금 당하고 본사에 와서 서를도 상당이 당하얏는데 그가 조선일보를 인게하는 벽두에 그사의 중요인물을 빼서간 것은 거긔에 대한 첫복수전이라고 한다. 그것이 과연 복수전인지 그것은 알 수 업스나 자긔가 본사 편즙국장으로 앙모하고 섬긔던 이광수씨를 도로혀 자긔 부하로 다려갈 때에 마음인즉 남모르게 통퀘하얏슬 것이다.

朴熙道
그는 체격이 그러케 크니 만큼 식량도 또한 큰데 점심에도 석넝탕은 보통 두 그릇이오 스긔야기도 육칠인분은 농식한다고.

宋鎭禹
그는 수염이 업다고 여러사람들이 붓으로 말로하도 초드럿더니 남모르게 무슨 약을 발넛던지 요새에는 맛치 사막에 풀나덧이 몃대가 나왓다. 그대로 잘 보호한다면 한갑때 쯤은 무려 수십대는 될듯.

李允宰
언제이나 도보주의(徒步主義) 요겨울에도 외투안이입기로 유명한 이유재씨는 그 대신 남다른 토수를 끠고 다니는데 시간이 밧분탓으로 부주의하야 그러한지 토수짝을 각금 박수어 끠고 학교에 가서 교수하다가 학생들의게 발견이 되면 이짜(而字) 우슴을 자발한다고.

李克魯
경제학박사 이극로씨는 조선의 신경제정책은 고무신으로부터 라는 듯이 언제나 고무신만 신고 다닌다. 그러나 그 정책이 아즉 통제가 못되여 그 부인은 여전이 구두를 신고 다니더라고.

獨孤璇과 司空桓
중동학교와 사공환씨와 경성보육의 독고선씨는 그 성이 다 복성(複姓)이다. 그런데 처음으로 그 학교에 입학하는 학생들은 그들의 성이 복성인줄을 모르고 독고선씨는 왈독선생사 공환씨는 왈사선생이라 하야 다른 선생들을 각금웃기는 일이잇다.

尹致昊와 朴勝彬
윤치호씨는 매 토요일마다 전가족을 다리고 양식집에 가서 양식을 자시고 박승빈씨는 매 목요일을 금육(禁肉)데로  하야 전 가족이 소찬을 한다고 한다. 그것도 돈만흔 사람이 할일!.

丁七星
근우회해소(槿友會解消) 소리가 난후로 할 일이 업는 그는 모사편물(毛絲編物)과 자수(刺繡)로 소일을 하고 잇다. 이로부터는 사회주의(絲繪主義)로 전환인가.

處女慈惠와 夫人慈惠
신동아사의 김자혜씨와 근화학교의 김자혜씨가 성명이 꼭 가튼 까닭에 어떤 때에는 신동아의 김자헤씨를 보고 김미리사씨와 근화녀학교의 소식을 뭇는 이로 잇고 또 근화의 김자헤씨를 보고는 신동아 신가정에 관한 일을 뭇는 일이 잇다. 그 뿐아이라 심한 때에는 신동아의 처녀 김자헤씨에게 편연(片戀)을 하는 시럽슨 남자의 구혼편지가 이미 출가한 근화의 김자헤씨에게로 오는 일이 간혹 잇다고 한다.

李甲秀와 李甲洙
두 분은 성명이 비슷한데다가 또 가튼 의사인 까닭에 각금 혼동하야 오해하기가 쉽다. 그 중 우스운 례는 작년에 李甲秀씨가 조선호텔에서 결혼피로연을 하는데 알지도 못하는 뜻박게 손님이 만히 와서 퍽 이상이 녁이엿더니 야종에 알고보니 李甲秀씨를 李甲洙씨로 잘못 알고 온 분이 퍽 만헛더라고.

金起田
다년간 신앙으로 해주요양원(海州療養院)에 가서 치료를 밧고 잇는 김긔전씨는 근례 정과가 매우 양호한데 순조로 나아간다면 금년 봄 혹은 여름중으로 괘복이되리라고 한다. 그런데 한가지 감사한 일은 그 병원에서 그를 이때까지 무료로 치료를 하야 줄 뿐만아이라 그를 위하야 공긔조흔 해안에다 특별병실까지 지여주고 이압흐로 퇴원할 때까지 무료치료를 하기로 하얏다는 것이다.

李敦化
어린이들은 그를 보면 구리대선생님이라고 한다. 그것은 그가 방구를 잘뀌여서 그 별명을 어든 것이 아니라 어린사람들과 이야기 할 때이면 녯날 녜적에 구리대귀신이 잇는대 구리냐 구리다 구리냐 구리다... ... 란 이야기를 잘하는 까닭에 그 별명을 어든 것이다.

崔善益
그는 그 사에서 아긔부사장이란 별명이 잇다. 그것은 그의 인격에 관한 말이 아니라 매신의 이상협(李相協) 동아의 장덕수(張德秀) 조선의 이광수(李光洙) 등 각사 여러 부사장에 비하야 신문경협이 아즉 일천하고 나히가 젊다는 의미다.＜21＞
＜18-21＞