Magazine Title	別乾坤 제69호
Publication Date	1934년 01월 01일
Article Title	懸賞問題 (Prize Puzzle)
Author
Article Type	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-editing notes)

Prize Puzzle

As you can see from the picture, the rings are intertwined, making it difficult to come to one’s senses. Now, to separate them, do we have to cut all three? Or can we separate them by cutting only one or two? (You must clearly indicate which ring you are referring to.) Entries that do not comply with the prize rules below will be invalid.

Important notes when sending in your prize entry:
★ Must arrive at our office by February 15th.
★ Write your answer simply on a postcard-sized piece of paper, and be sure to include your address and name clearly.
★ You must attach the reader certificate found at the bottom of this page to your answer sheet. Entries without it will be invalid.
★ On the envelope, write "Kyŏngsŏng Kaebyŏksa Pyŏlgŏn'gŏn Prize Department (京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係)" and also write "Manuscript Enclosed (原稿在中)" in red ink on the side, seal the edge, and attach a 2-chŏn stamp. If you do not write "Manuscript Enclosed (原稿在中)", you will be fined (for insufficient postage).

Prizes
First Prize (One Person): One Special Edition Fountain Pen
Other Prizes (99 People): One Book Each
Presented

Winners of the Previous Month's Issue
Correct answer: When the clock is sick, you can place it on the North Pole.
First Prize: Pang Sin-hŭi (方信熙), Chupashi-chŏng, Kyŏngsŏng (京城舟橋町)
This time, there was only one person who got it right, so we have awarded them First Prize.

★ How to Order the Magazine

It's a bit funny to have to explain how to order the magazine again, but in fact, despite there being a safe and inexpensive method, there are often difficulties for both those ordering the magazine and our company due to errors. Currently, a considerable number of people send money by postal transfer, but even more people try to send it more easily by buying stamps or simply putting cash in an envelope with a 3-chŏn stamp. However, sending it this way can sometimes lead to loss in transit or other errors, causing difficulties, so from now on, we would like you to use the postal transfer account (振替口座) as much as possible. It may take a day or two longer than sending stamps, but this is the safest and cheapest method. Even with this method, errors can easily occur if you do not clearly write your address and the name of the magazine you are ordering. (Kaebyŏksa (開闢社) Postal Transfer Account is Kyŏngsŏng (京城) 8106).
<54>
Named Entities

京城舟橋町	Kyŏngsŏng Chupashi-chŏng
方信熙	Pang Sin-hŭi
開闢社	Kaebyŏksa
京城	Kyŏngsŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제69호
발행일	1934년 01월 01일
기사제목	懸賞問題
기사형태	사고·편집후기

懸賞問題

그림으로 보시다십히 고리셋이맛여잇서서 정신을 차리기가 어렵슴니다. 그런데 지금이것을 서로 러지게하려면셋을 죄다 어야하겟슴닛가? 그러치안으면 하나나 둘만 어도 되겟슴니가?(어느 고리라는 것을 분명히적어보내서야함니다) 아래의 현상보내는 규정에틀리면 무효임니다.
懸賞보낼의 注意활일
★오는 二月十五日지 본사에 와닷도록되여야합니다.
★엽서만한 조회에다 대답을 간단히 적어보내되 반듯이자긔주소와 성명을 이써야합니니다.
★이페지(頁)한해잇는 독자증을 답안용지에다 반듯이 부처야합니다. 안부치면 무효입니다.
★피봉에는 반듯이 『京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係』라쓰고 엽헤다 『原稿在中』이라고 간잉크로쓰고 한주둥이를 고 二錢우표붓처보내주십시오. 原稿在中이라고 안쓰면 벌금(不足)을 물게됩니다.
賞品
一等一人 特製萬年筆壹個
等外九十九人 書籍一部式
進呈합니다
前月號當選發
正解시게가 병낫슬대븍극에다지면된다
一等 京城舟橋町 方信熙
이번에는 맛춘분이  한분밧게 업서서 그분을 그냥 一等으로 하엿습니다.
★雜誌注文하는 法
잡지주문하는법을 이제새삼스러말슴드린다는게 좀 우슴슴니다만 사실에에잇서 돈적게드리고 가장안전한 힘이 잇슴에 불구하고 간혹잘못되야 책주문하신분이나 본사로서 여간곤란한경우가 적지안슴니다.---지금통게로본다면 진체저금으로 보내시는분도 결코적은 수효가아니나 그보다도편하게 보내시노라고 우표를 사보내시거나 그럿치안으면 현금을 그냥 봉투ㅅ속에 넛코 三전을 붓처보내는분지잇섯슴니다. 그런데 이럿케보내시는 것은 간혹가다중간에 분실되기나기타다른 착오로인하야 곤란한 경우가 만사오니 압흐로는 되도록 진체구좌(振替口座)를 리용하셧스면함니다. 우표를 너어보내시는것보다 하로나잇흘 느저질는지도 모르나 료금적게주고 가장안전한 방법은 이것밧게 엄슴니다. 이것도자긔주소와 주문잡지일홈을 하게 적지안으면 착오가생기기쉽슴니다.(開闢社振替口座는 京城八一○六番)
＜54＞