별건곤 제3호
1927년 01월 01일
京城各商店 看板品評會 (Gyeongseong Storefront Sign Appraisal)
審査記者 金復鎭, 安碩柱, 一記者 (Review Journalists Kim Bok-jin, An Seok-ju, A Reporter)
대담·좌담 (Interview/Roundtable Discussion)

Gyeongseong Storefront Sign Appraisal
Review Journalists Kim Bok-jin, An Seok-ju, A Reporter
This storefront sign appraisal doesn't have any special meaning. We troubled Mr. Kim and Mr. An to provide a simple review, hoping it might be of some reference to the commercial sector of Joseon people. We hope for the understanding and patronage of those in the commercial sector.

Reporter: Let's start from Jongno 3-chome. Of course, there must be other stores with signs, but there probably won't be anything particularly eye-catching or anything that stands out in a negative way. So, shall we start with this one?

Bok: The Baekmokya Haberdashery's position is slightly southeast-facing, and there's a wide intersection diagonally in front. The store building is rather cramped, but thanks to the sign's effect, the cramped appearance doesn't awkwardly stand out. Considering the store's location and the road's shape, it's best to make it easily visible to passersby from a distance.

If it were a high-rise building, there would be no need to rely on the sign's power, but in stores like this, it's necessary to attract attention with the sign. This store's sign uniquely stands out from a distance. What's the reason for that? I think it lies in the width of the font, which makes it look profound. I think it's due to the harmony between the somewhat dark store interior and the depth of the sign, as well as the fact that the sign isn't properly separated. I think it has a considerable effect not only from a distance but also with the interesting font even from close range. <114>

Seok: (Agrees)

Reporter: What about the Funeral Supplies and Woodworking Factory? (婚喪具靈轝築産木工場)

Bok: Ah—this place has made its characteristics known. But regarding the sign itself, they failed. However, the two strips of painted wooden pieces for funeral biers (喪轝用 丹靑한 木片) serve as a "silent sign" (『無言의 看板』), sufficiently explaining everything.

Seok: I also agree with Hyung's words. But that kind of style and those colors have been familiar to us for so long that they don't particularly resonate. It might only satisfy the curiosity of foreign tourists. However, as a manufacturer of funeral biers, there is a certain meaningful flavor, but that's not the effect of the sign; it's the building or the paint that gives that feeling. You could consider it a kind of sign, but let's hold back on that a bit.

Dong-A Football Manufacturing Company

Reporter: Isn't the sign of the Dong-A Women's Association (東亞婦人商會) charming? Maybe it's just because it's a women's store that it looks that way to me... Haha, what do you think?

Seok: If you evaluate everything from that perspective, it'll be hard to see the flaws (though focusing solely on flaws isn't really a fair evaluation). Here's what I think: If they hadn't covered the roof with such a large sign, the goods inside the already small building would have looked quite meager. But apart from this sign, it seems like few stores have tried to concretely represent their products on their signs. And the fact that they've utilized Joseon style as much as possible makes it seem a bit more approachable. However, the colors are too complex, and I wonder if they fail to catch the eye of passersby and therefore give a sense of discomfort.

Bok: Either way, it's not very well done. Firstly, since it's a women's store, it wouldn't be an overstatement to have a woman's portrait occupy the entire sign, but it's not something to do for a relatively large store. And what's the connection between Roman paintings (羅馬古畵) or semi-nude pictures and this store? It's funny, but I also sometimes see copies of Roman paintings and see them in a different light. And the most clumsy thing about the sign is that it tries to achieve a good effect with its size (量). <115>

Reporter: Isn't the sign of the Ewha Foreign Goods Store Shoe Department (梨花洋行洋靴部) strange?

Bok: Yes, that's true. I don't remember which store it was before, but there was something similar. But this isn't a bad sign at all. Moreover, it surprisingly stands out even more thanks to the yellow sign of Jeil Deokwon Store (第一 德元商店). This is called borrowing scenery (借景). I don't know how necessary borrowing scenery is for signs and architecture. If they pay attention to this point in the future, it will be spectacular.

Seok: Saying it will be spectacular might be a bit of an exaggeration. I once saw something similar in the advertising section of a Western magazine, and I think I also saw something like it once on Honmachi Street (本町通). But imitating good things (for signs and such) is much better than imitating bad things. After all, it might be unprecedented for our store signs. It's because everyone can probably guess that it's a foreign shoe store...

Reporter: Oops, I forgot. We passed by too quickly to see it properly, but what about the Lim Hat Store (林帽子店) sign? Isn't it very sentimental to have a Western woman wearing a "silk hat" playing a "mandolin" in front of a handsome Western man sitting there, with a landscape in the background?

Seok: You're saying all sorts of things. It doesn't seem like that sign has anything to do with that hat store. Even if they only sold "silk hats" there, wouldn't they feel a bit embarrassed? If they attract customers with such a sign, wouldn't it damage their own reputation? And what relationship do we have with that scene, with the Gwangmudae (光武臺) background and the beautiful landscape divorced from our people and our lives? (Since many of the customers are our people.) Apart from the meaning of the sign, wouldn't attracting customers require other intense stimuli or temptations beyond magic? I want to say this: Commerce must flatter its target audience. And it succeeds by invading the lives of the other party. Commerce has a great mission, like acquiring a large country from another.

Bok: Of course, that's true, but strange or ugly things can also have a unique effect. It might not be orthodox, but there are many such examples in Joseon... Anyway, this is a sign that subtly attracts attention.

Reporter: What about the sign of the Dongyang Pharmaceutical Company? (東洋製藥社) They just put the single character (藥 - Medicine) on that small sign, so it stands out, but is it aesthetically pleasing? I lack aesthetic sense, though.

Bok: No, aesthetics aren't the issue. <116> Generally, the sign itself isn't going to be that beautiful. In a world where things like this exist, all we can do is just look at them. Enough with the small talk—it's the best of what we've seen so far. I think the blue line around the character "medicine" (『약』) has a considerable effect. Shouldn't this be seen as a "sign" worthy of being called a sign? In terms of quality, I mean.

Seok: Generally, I agree.

Reporter: This time, let's evaluate the bookstore signs. The bookstore signs are all... similar, so wouldn't it be better to evaluate them all at once? I'm not particularly impressed either, like Deokheung Bookstore (德興書林), Dongyang Academy (東洋書院), Bakmun Hall (博文書館), and Yeongchang Bookstore (永昌書館), etc.

Seok: They're all equally unremarkable. Maybe it's because they're bookstore signs, but I don't know if the Bookstore Association decided to put them up. The writing isn't great, and neither is the color of the frame or the color of the background. People who run bookstores should be knowledgeable, so why are the signs so clueless? The funniest thing is that each of those bookstore signs has a furnace chimney sticking out in front of it, blocking the sign. They probably have a good reason for it......

Bok: Let's talk about borrowing scenery (借景), as I mentioned earlier. Borrowing scenery means using someone else's things to your advantage. Since signs have a competitive meaning in the city, people with clear minds will succeed in this regard. Even for bookstores, it doesn't have to be a huge, almost illiterate semi-cursive style. I completely agree with what An-gun said.

Reporter: What about the stores in the row under the Youth Hall (靑年會館), which looks like a row of stalls?

Bok: I think the inclination of all the signs there is wrong. Regardless of what they sell, this is probably the biggest flaw.

Seok: Neither ugly nor pretty signs! Isn't it a bit regrettable that the sacred appearance of the Youth Hall, the only Christian facility, is being damaged? <117>

Reporter: Ikki, if the Yuchang Trading Company (裕昌商會), in front of Jonggak, had such a funny and very tall triangular building on Jongno intersection, it would be more famous than the American Singer Company in Joseon. Look at that board. On a wall that's ten thousand jang above the ground... Please, don't be too harsh on this trading company that has achieved such a grand appearance even before opening.

Seok: How can you criticize a newly built, oddly shaped building? I wonder how high the sign of that building is. You'd have to look at it from Samgaksan (三角山). Hey, reporter! Please quench my thirst. I'm short, and the reporter-yeonggam is also short, so where can I see it? My legs are shaking, so I don't want to evaluate this sign.

Bok: To borrow a Westerner's words, a Japanese woman's makeup is like a person who has just jumped out of a coffin, with a pale face and a yellow-brown color from the neck down. Similarly, a store's sign informs consumers of the store's existence and decorates the store itself. Then, this kind of sign on this store is enough for even non-Westerners like us to know that it's no different from a Japanese woman's makeup. In general, why does a semi-circular sign clash with modern architecture, and why does a round, flat semi-cursive font clash with an acute-angled building?

Reporter: Well, it's Hwapeongdang Pharmacy's (和平堂藥房) turn. How many years has this sign been there? It never changes, so I don't know if they've gotten attached to it, but what do you think of it?

Bok: It's an anachronistic ceremonial robe. I want to say that the figure on the sign is ridiculous. The ugliest thing is the most eye-catching, so if it's not harmful, whether it's a picture or whatever, it's fine. They've been doing business peacefully with this sign all this time, so there shouldn't be any problems.

Seok: Doesn't it look exactly like the "Jintan" (仁丹) brand? Looking at the sign, it seems like they've made enough money and don't need to make any more. I don't know if it's a good thought, but I wish they'd think a little bit about the reputation of our commercial sector as a whole. So, what do you think about improving the exterior first?

Reporter: Since we're passing by, should we say a word about Sikdogaon (食道園)? They're advertising that they received a first-place gold medal.

Bok: I think this kind of sign is just right for Sikdogaon. They need to evoke foreign sentiment to attract Japanese friends. But if they take it a step further and improve the entrance décor as well as the sign, the effect would be even greater. A sign can never stand on its own. There must be good harmony between the building and the sign, and only then will the sign's intended power arise.

Seok: Overall, it attracts more attention than the signs we've evaluated so far. The sign is gilded on the bottom, symbolizing the omnipotence of gold, and the letters look like they were written with a broom. Anyway, that cleverly <118> thought-out sign is enough to win the hearts of the yangban (南村 양반) of Namchon, so I hope they make a lot of money.

Reporter: At the big Gwanggyo (廣橋) intersection, on the old site of Obok Store (五福商店), the sign has changed several times, and now Fukushima Store (福島商店) has been there for quite a while and seems to be thriving. I guess the owner spends more money or has better skills than the previous people. Oh, that's just small talk. What do you think of that sign?

Seok: It's a sign made with the skills of someone with a very sharp brain. They covered the original Fukushima Store sign, which had three-color lines running across it, with a sign that said "Providing at Original Price" (「元價提供」). It's not that the sign itself has good colors or lines, but they made the bold decision to cover up what should have been there based on the current market situation! It seems like they thought about how to attract customers in the face of recession (『씩-슨』).

Reporter: What about Baek Trading Company (白商會)?

Bok: I want to say it's one of the worst I've seen. There seem to be two or three signs of this type, so wouldn't it be better to talk about them all together?

Seok: Since the topic has come up, let's do it. A sign made of wire mesh, a sign that's only useful in the summer, is shivering in this cold midwinter, making the viewer feel even colder. I don't know if the sign is needed for the sake of the beautiful flesh color of a woman draped in gauze, but the background is covered with old, white "punky" painted tin pieces, with dust caked on them - like a goblin's lair - making the whole thing creepy... To use this kind of mesh sign, the back of the mesh must be clean.

Reporter: Let's talk briefly about the Geumgang Trading Company (金剛商會) sign.

Bok: It seems like this store has changed several times, but it's the same as before. After all, can you feel a connection with such a big store with that sign?

Seok: But unnecessary clutter only results in ugliness. On the contrary, such simplicity might be better, but <119> since the timing is right, the sign's effectiveness seems like it will be great.

Reporter: Ah, they cleverly spaced the letters on that sign. They put "Yeongchang Pi" (永昌皮) and then inserted "Mark" in the middle, and then "Leather Trading Company" (革商會). If they threw out the "Mark" in the middle and put in the character "Han" (한), it would be "Yeongchang Pihan Leather Trading Company" (영창피한피혁상회), hahaha. What do you think of that sign?

Bok (Seok): (Laugh at the same time)

Reporter: This is a pharmacy that seems quite lonely, located a bit far away. What about the Cheonil Pharmacy Hwanggeum-cho branch (天一藥房黃金町支店) sign, right next to Eun Songjeong (銀松亭)?

Seok: Whether it's the big sign or the signs hung on each column, anyone can see that it's a Chinese herbal medicine store. The type is similar to the Sikdogaon sign, but it seems a bit more high-class.

Bok: It's well done. Wooden tablets with inscribed couplets (목각 주련) also serve as signs. The regrettable thing is that I don't understand why everything from Jang Yeongrak Store (張永樂商店) to the Colonial Bank (殖産公司) is hung up in such a similar way.

Reporter: Let's walk down from the Gwanghwamun (光化門) gate to Jongno. For some reason, there isn't anything particularly eye-catching.

Bok (Seok): I guess that's right.

Reporter: The Yeongseong Foreign Shoe Store (永成洋靴店) catches my eye first.

Bok: That's right. There's a strange taste in the picture, and it looks neither too vulgar nor too graceful, so it's a success.

Seok: I agree.

Reporter: Here's the Deokwon Store (德元商店), and there are rumors that they have two or three branches and even manage the Dong-A Women's Association (東亞婦人商會). What do you think of this store's sign?

Seok: Well, it's quite different from what I expected. Whether they aim for substantial content or not... I wish that such a store would either get rid of the sign to help itself or to help the city's beauty, or focus on it.

Bok: Silent.

Reporter: Then what about the sign of the Han-Young Company (漢英公司) next to that store?

Bok: It's just so-so, but this store's sign is better than the Deokwon Store's sign. But they drew a separate line to show the thickness of the letters. I wonder if it would be better if they changed this upward. The columns carved on both sides of the sign aren't very special, as the sign is hung high up.

Seok: Silence.

Reporter: Coming here reminds me... What about the Hwaseong Trading Company (和信商會)?

Seok: Well, this place is located on a site that anyone can easily see at the Jongno intersection, and it's in the center of Joseon's city, so I think they should consider many things in various ways. <120> But I don't think it's an outright monstrosity.

Bok: The gold background is large and plausible. It seems confident and worthy of the sign of a well-known store.

Reporter: The fact that the Kim Heung-ho Sales Store (金興鎬販賣店) next to the Jongno Police Station (鍾路警察署) and the Daeryuk Rubber Gyeongseong Main Sales Store (大陸고무京城總販賣店) at the corner of the courthouse (裁判所) have such a strange location and connection makes it impossible not to say something.

Bok: Well, the Kim Heung-ho Sales Store is unique in its diverse style, but there's no difference between it and a barbarian's adornments. The Daeryuk Rubber Gyeongseong Main Sales Store is the best of this type. Why is that? Because putting letters on top of letters on wire mesh or wooden pieces is the advantage of this style, as the letters stand out clearly and look cheap at the same time. There's a necessary requirement for this, and it's not much, but it's in the background. This store, which has made the background almost invisible, is the best.

Seok: I agree.

Reporter: Hanchang Trading Company (漢昌商會), Lee Wan-sik Store (李完植商店), and Jongseong Trading Company (鐘聲商會) all have similar signs. Will you evaluate them?

Seok: They're more ordinary than signs made with ugly pictures. As ordinary as they are, there are no distinctive features between the two ends to evaluate.

Bok: Cloth stores, wool stores, even rubber shoe sellers, and bookstores as well, all make their signs in the same way, so maybe there's some kind of regulation. It's a peculiar phenomenon.

Reporter: "Self-Made Shoe Shop" (自作製靴所)? Are there any that are made by others?

Bok: Whatever the name, it's well done overall.

Seok: That neat and designed sign seems to mean refinement there. Since it's a women's shoe specialty store, the sign is also neat, but the side sign is not comparable to it.

Reporter: Next is the Joseon Women's Arts and Crafts Society! (朝鮮婦人技藝社) Isn't that sign like a demure young lady?

Seok: There's no rule that a sign must be a picture, but it seems that the Art and Craft Society is expressed, and the lettering matches the picture. I think it will only last a few times as it stands out so much in monochrome. However, is there a sense that it is a bit flimsy?

Bok: It's very subtle. The entire store is well unified. Like An-gun said, it is rare that has so much pleasure is found in monochrome.

Reporter: Let's go see the Gyeongil Foreign Shoe Store (京一洋靴店) too.

Bok: It would be appropriate for this store to only draw the pictures needed for a foreign shoe store. However, it is unbearable to see those attached at the corner. This deviation is not necessarily only in this store, but it is even more noticeable in this store.

Seok: I have no other opinion.

Reporter: Is there anything to see? Let's talk about the Dong-A Football Manufacturing Company (東亞풋뽈製造公司).

Bok: Yes, it is a rare picture in Seoul. Whether it is a picture of a person or an animal similar to a person, it is truly an ugly sign for a person to look at.

Seok: The signs that have been reviewed so far are worthy of review regardless of their beauty, but it is rare for a sign to fall into the category of this sign, but even though it is their own taste, the sign is ultimately meant to be shown to others, so I think it would be good to improve it, and then the product will sell more.

Reporter: Next, let's look at the Seonseong Department Store (先施百貨商店).

Bok: It would be good to create necessities from unnecessary-looking drawings. The fact that it curves and turns around is also a way of a store sign. In this sense, I don't want to see it as too bad.

Seok: As a way to comfort the fatigue and exhaustion of passersby, such a sign may be useful at times, but does it give the impulse to buy a product after seeing it? However, if you can't say it's ugly, you can't say it's a good product, so you can't blame it.

Reporter: Park Deok-yu Foreign Shoe Store (朴德裕洋靴店) claims to be the originator of the foreign shoe industry when you listen to his words, but what would you say about his sign? <122>

Seok: If that is the case, it would be better to have such a large picture sign with that much year or as the originator. Compared to the middle sign, the rooftop sign is ugly. The lettering and the color of the frame rather detract from the appearance of the building. It is not a masterpiece, but is it not enough with the middle sign?

Bok: Shall I say that I do not understand even when I see it?

Reporter: What about the Geumhui Musical Instrument Store (琴喜樂器商店)?

Bok: As I said before, signs are also put up for decoration purposes. So, in this store, you have to modernize the sign font. Like the house... .

Seok: I agree.

Reporter: The Asahi Western Clothing Store (朝日洋服店) is dripping with Japanese style.

Bok: Well, the name itself has such a taste... ...

Seok: I put up a Western clothing store sign, but there was nothing to see. Still, this would be simpler.

Reporter: Then let's look at another one, the Sangtae Western Clothing Store (相泰洋服店).

Bok: If you look at it day and night, it's the same old story. If you don't draw Western people's legs or something long, it looks like it's showing something that isn't a human being like this house... Let's just stop.

Seok: Agree.

Reporter: Then let's stop here, but what was the best and what was the worst among the ones you saw?

Bok: From what I think, the best would be the Joseon Pharmaceutical Company (朝鮮製藥社) in Jongno or the Joseon Women's Arts and Crafts Society (朝鮮婦人技藝社) in Jeon-dong.

Seok: I am also the Joseon Women's Arts and Crafts Society and the Jongno-tong Ewha Foreign Shoe Store.

Reporter: Then what is the most unsightly next?

Bok: There are so many that it is difficult to choose, but shall we say Baek Trading Company (白商會), Yuchang Trading Company (裕昌商會), Dong-A Manufacturing Company (東亞製造公司), and Gyeongil Shoe Store (京一鞋店)?

Seok: I don't know what to base it on, but I agree with Hyung's. <123>

**Named Entities**

鍾路 3丁目	Chongno 3-chome
白木屋洋品店	Baekmokya Haberdashery
第一 德元商店	Jeil Deogwon Store
本町通	Honmachi Street
光武臺	Kwangmu-dae
東洋製藥社	Tongyang Pharmaceutical Company
德興書林	Tŏkhŭng Sŏrim
東洋書院	Tongyang Sŏwon
博文書館	Pakmun-gwan
永昌書館	Yŏngch'ang Sŏgwan
靑年會館	Ch'ŏngnyŏn Hoe-gwan
鍾閣	Chonggak
三角山	Samgaksan
和平堂藥房	Hwapeongdang Yakpang
仁丹	In-tan
食道園	Sikdogaon
南村	Namch'on
廣橋	Kwanggyo
五福商店	Obok Sangjom
福島商店	Pukushima Sangjom
白商會	Paek Sanghoe
金剛商會	Kŭmgang Sanghoe
永昌皮한피혁상회	Yŏngch'ang P'ihan P'ihyŏk Sanghoe
銀松亭	Ŭnsongjŏng
天一藥房黃金町支店	Ch'ŏnil Yakpang Hwanggeum-chŏng Chijŏm
張永樂商店	Chang Yŏngnak Sangjŏm
殖産公司	Siksang Kongsa
光化門	Kwanghwa-mun
永成洋靴店	Yŏngsŏng Yanghwa-jŏm
德元商店	Tŏgwŏn Sangjŏm
漢英公司	Han-Yŏng Kongsa
和信商會	Hwasin Sanghoe
鍾路警察署	Chongno Kyŏngch'al-sŏ
金興鎬販賣店	Kim Hŭng-ho P'anmaejŏm
裁判所	Ch'aep'an-so
大陸고무京城總販賣店	Taeryuk Komu Kyŏngsŏng Ch'ongp'anmaejŏm
漢昌商會	Hanch'ang Sanghoe
李完植商店	Ri Wan-sik Sangjom
鐘聲商會	Chongsŏng Sanghoe
自作製靴所	Chajak Chehwajŏ
朝鮮婦人技藝社	Chosŏn P'uin Kiye-sa
京一洋靴店	Kyŏngil Yanghwajŏm
東亞풋뽈製造公司	Tong-A P'utppol Chejojongsa
先施百貨商店	Sŏnsi Paekhwa Sangjŏm
朴德裕洋靴店	Pak Tŏk-yu Yanghwajŏm
琴喜樂器商店	Kŭmhui Rakki Sangjŏm
朝日洋服店	Asahi Yangbok-jŏm
相泰洋服店	Sangtae Yangbok-jŏm



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제3호
발행일	1927년 01월 01일
기사제목	京城各商店 看板品評會
필자	審査記者 金復鎭, 安碩柱, 一記者
기사형태	대담·좌담

京城各商店 看板品評會
						審査記者 金復鎭, 安碩柱, 一記者
看板品評會 별다른 뜻이 잇는 것 아님니다. 朝鮮 사람의 상업계에 조곰이라도의 참고가 될가 하야 金安 두 분을 괴로히 하야 간단한 평을 청한 것임니다. 다행히 상업계 諸氏의 理解잇는 愛讀이 잇스시기를 바람니다.

記者  여보 鍾路 3丁目으로서부터 시작하기로 합시다. 이외에도 물론 간판 다라노은 상점이 업는 바 안일 것이나 별로 눈에 띄일 만한 것도 업슬 것이며 다른 의미로 눈에 거슬녀 보히는 것도 업슬 것 아니요. 그러니 이집부터 시작할가요.

復  白木屋洋品店의 位置난 약간 東南向일뿐더러 넓은 십자로가 압흐로 비끗하게 잇고 상점건물로는 협착한 편이나 간판의 효과로 인하야 도로혀 그 협작한 푼수가 서트롭게 눈에 띄이지 안치요. 이 상점의 位置로 또는 도로의 형세로 어듸로 보던지 원거리에서 통행인의 시선에 잘 보히도록 하는 것이 得策일 것임니다.
가령 고층의 건물이라면 하필 간판의 힘을 차용할 까닭도 업슬 것이나 이와 갓흔 상점에서난 간판으로서 주목을 끌 필요가 잇다고 봄니다. 이집 간판은 원거리에서 특이하게 시선에 드러옴니다. 그러면 그 원인은 어데 잇슬가요. 그것은 字體의 廣狹으로서 심오하게 보이는데에 잇는 줄 암니다. 좀 어두운 듯한 상점 내부와 간판의 깁히 보이는 것과의 조화의 묘를 엇어 간판 제대로 分離하여 잇지 안음에 잇는 줄 암니다. 원거리 뿐만 아니라 근거리에서도 흥미 잇는 字體로 하야＜114＞ 상당한 효과가 잇다고 생각함니다.
碩  (同感)
記者  그 다음  婚喪具靈轝築産木工場은 엇덥닛가.
復  아- 이 집은 자기네의 특색을 알도록 하엿슴니다. 그러나 간판이라고 의식하고 한 것은 실패하엿지만 二條의 喪轝用 丹靑한 木片으로 하야 『無言의 看板』 진정이 설명이 다 되지 안은가 함니다.
碩  형의 말에 나 亦 동감이오. 그러나 그러한 형식과 그러한 색채는 우리들의 눈에 저진지 오래엿서 별로히 감촉이 적으나 외국인 관광단의 호기심에 충족할 따름이겟지오. 그러나 喪轝貫家로는 그럴 뜻 십흔 맛이 업지 안어 잇스나 그것은 간판의 효과가 아니라 건물이라던지 거긔에 칠한 丹靑가튼 것이 그러한 늑김을 주는 바 그것을 일종의 간판이라고도 간주할 수 잇슬지 모르지마는 그것은 그대로 좀 눌러 봄시다 그려.

東亞풋볼제조공사

記者  여-東亞婦人商會의 간판이야말로 아담하지 안슴니가. 원래 婦人商店이래서 내 눈에 그러케 보히는지 모르겟스나...... 하하하 자-엇덥닛가.
碩  모든 것을 그러한 관년으로 평한다면 결점이 잘 안 보히겟지요, (물론 결점만 본다는 것이 평이랄 수 업겟지만) 나는 이러케 봄니다. 만약 그러케 큰 간판으로 집웅을 싸서 세워 노치 안엇더면 갓득이나 야튼 건물에 그 안에 실린 상품들이 퍽 빈약하게 보엿슬 것이지오. 그러나 이곳 간판 외에 그 상점의 상품들을 구체적으로 표현하랴고 애쓴 듯한 간판이 적은 것 가트며, 될 수 잇는대로 朝鮮風을 利用한 것이 조금 친절해 보이는 것 갓구료. 그러나 색채가 너무 복잡하여서 길 가는 사람의 순간적인 시선에 촉감이 달하지 못하고 따라서 괴롭게 하는 늣김이 업슬가 함니다.
復  좌우간 그리 잘 되지는 못하엿슴니다. 첫재로 婦人商店이닛가 여자의 畵像으로 간판 전부를 차지한대야 망발은 아닐지나 제법 크다란 상점으로는 취하지 안을 일이지요. 그러고 羅馬古畵라던가＜115＞ 半裸體의 그림이 이 상점과 엇던 關聯이 잇슬가요 우수운 말나 역시 지나다니다가도 간혹 羅馬古畵의 복사하여 노은 것은 다른 의미로 보기는 함니다. 그러고 가장 간판으로서 서투른 것은 덩치(量)로 조흔 효과를 엇으랴 한 것임니다.
記者  梨花洋行洋靴部의 간판은 이상하지 안슴닛가.
復  네-사실 그럿슴니다. 옛날 엇던 집인지는 기억에 남지 안엇스나 이와 갓흔 것이 잇섯슴니다. 마는 이것은 간판으로 납분 편은 결코 안임니다. 더구나 의외로 제이 德元商店의 황색 간판으로 하야 눈에 더 잘 띄게 되엿슴니다. 이런 것을 借景이라고 함니다. 간판이라던가 건축에 잇서 借景이 얼마나 필요한지 모름니다. 압흐로 이 점에 留意를 한다면 가관일 것이외다.
碩  가관되리라는 것은 조금 과장이겟지오, 내 언젠가 서양 잡지, 광고면에서 그와 비슷한 것을 보앗고 그 뒤에 언젠가 本町通에서 본 듯 십흠니다, 그러나 模作도 (간판 가튼 데에는) 조흔 것을 模作함은 醜作보담은 훨신 나흘 것 갓슴니다. 대관절, 우리네 상점 간판으로서는 破天荒이 아닐지오. 그것은 洋靴店이라는 것을 누구나 짐작할 수 잇슬 것 가튼 까닭에......
記者  앗차 이젓군. 너무 지나와서 보지 안코 평할 수는 업지만 林帽子店 간판이엇덧슴닛가, 「씰크햇」 쓴 서양 女子가 「만도린」 뜻는 그 압헤 준수한 서양 미남자가 안저 잇는 것이라던지 그 뒤에 풍경이던지 몹시는 정서적이 아님닛가.
碩  별 말삼을 다 하심니다. 그 간판이 그 帽子商店과는 아무런 관련이 업는 것 갓지 안어요. 바로 그 곳에서 「씰크햇」 만 판대도 쑥스러운 감이 업지 안은데...... 그러한 간판으로 고객을 끈대서야 自家 명예에 손상이 안일넌지요. 그리고 光武臺 배경과 근사한 풍경 압헤 우리네의 인물과 생활에 격리한 그 풍정으로 된 간판이 우리와 무슨 관계가 잇겟슴닛가.(고객이 우리네 중에 만흔고로) 바로 간판의 意義를 떠나서라도 객을 끌기만 하자면 다른 격렬한 자극성이 잇다던가 마술 이상의 유혹이 필요치 안을가요. 나는 이러케 말 하고 십슴니다. 상업은 그 대상자에게 아첨을 하여야 함니다. 그래서 상대자의 생활을 침범하여야 성공함니다. 상업이 남의 큰 국가를 획득하는 데에도 큰 임명을 가진 것 갓치.
復  물론 그럿치마는 추한 것으로 신기한 것으로 이것으로도 특이한 효과가 업지 안은 것임니다. 正則이야 안일 것이나 朝鮮에 잇서서 이런 例가 퍽 만이 잇는데야...... 엇잿던 이것은 자미 적게 눈을 꺼는 간판임니다.
記者  이 東洋製藥社의 간판은 엇덧슴닛가. 그 조그만 간판에 그대로 (약)이란 글자 하나만 썻스니, 띄기는 얼는 띄지만 미관상으로 조흘가요, 나는 美意識에 결핍한 사람이지만요.
復  안이요. 미관 갓흔 것은 문제가 되지 안슴니다.＜116＞ 대체로 간판 자체가 그리 아름다울 것이 안이요. 이런 것이 잇는 세상에 거저 거대로 보는 수 밧게요. 한담은 고만두고-지금까지 본 중에 가장 낫슴니다. 『약』 이라는 글자에 외곽의 靑線으로 퍽 만은 功果가 잇는 줄 암니다. 이런 것이야말로 간판다운 『看板』 이라고 보지 안을넌지요. 質로 잇서 말임니다.
碩  대체로 동감임니다.
記者  이번에는 冊肆看板을 평해 보시지오. 冊肆看板이 여러 개가 다... 비슷비슷하니 한꺼번에 평하시는 것이 좃치 안을가요. 나 역시 感心은 못하겟슴니다만은 德興書林, 東洋書院, 博文書館, 永昌書館 등,
碩  다-똑가티 보잘 것 업슴니다. 冊肆看板이라 그럿켓지만 書籍組合에서 결의하고 세운 것인지는 모르겟지만 글시도, 신통치 못한데다가 뎨두리의 빗과 바닥의 비치라던지 冊肆하는 이는 박식일 터인데 엇재 그러케 沒覺된 간판인지? 가장 우수운 것은 그 여러 곳 冊肆의 간판마다 煖爐烟筒을 그 간판 압흘 가리여 뽑은 것임니다. 자기네들은 상당한 理由를 부치겟지만......
復  앗가도 잠간 말하엿지만 借景이라는 것을 말하며 볼가요. 借景이라는 것은 남의 것을 자기의게 유리하도록 빌어 쓰는 것임니다. 간판이라는 것은 도시 경쟁의 의미를 가지고 잇는 이상 두뇌의 맑은 사람은 이 점에 성공하는 것임니다. 서점하드래도 半草書式으로 거의 무식하게 커다란 것이야만 할 것은 아니지요, 安君의 말에 전부 동감이외다.
記者  靑年會館 아래 층 줄행낭 비슷하게 잇난 상점들의 것은 엇더함닛가.
復  여긔에는 전부 간판의 경사가 잘못되엿다고 봄니다. 무엇무엇 할 것 업시 이 점이 가장 큰 결점이겟지요.
碩  우불넝좌불넝한 간판! 기독교 편의 유일한 靑年會館의 신성한 외관이 毁傷되엿다고 늣겨지는 것이 좀 애석할 따름이라고 할 수 업슬지?＜117＞
記者  익키, 裕昌商會(鍾閣 압헤 잇는)집이야말로 익살맛고 퍽 놉군 삼각형 집이 鍾路 네 거리에 섯다면 朝鮮서는 米國씽거-會社보담도 더 유명해 지겟군. 저 着板 좀 보아. 지상으로부터 一萬 丈이나 되는 벽에... 여보시오 두 분 아즉 개업도 아니한 偉觀을 가추운 상회이니 너무 깍지는 마시오.
碩  남 새로 지은 기형의 집을 깍다니, 말삼이 됨니가. 그집의 간판은 엇지 놉흔지, 三角山에서 보아야 하겟군. 여보, 기자선생! 나 목말을 좀 태여 주시오. 이거 내 키도 작고 기자 영감의 키도 짧어서 어듸 보임니까, 이거 다리가 떨려서 이 간판은 나는 평하기 실슴니다.
復  서양 사람의 말을 빈다면 日本 女子의 화장이야말노 얼골은 관 속에서 바로 뚸여 나온 사람갓치 창백하고 목으로부터 아래난 황갈색이라고 한다. 이와 맛찬가지로, 상점의 간판도 소비자에게 자기의 상점의 존재을 알니난 한 편에 상점 자체를 장식하는 것이다. 그러면 이 집에 이 갓흔 간판이야말로 서양 사람 안인 우리로라도 넉넉히 日本 女子의 화장과 다름이 업는 것을 알 것임니다. 대체로 근대식 건축에 반원의 간판이 엇재서 당하느냐 말이고 銳角의 건물에 둥굴넙적한 半草書體가 엇재서 격이 마질 니가 잇느냐는 말임니다.
記者  자- 이제는 和平堂藥房 차례임니다. 이 간판은 그 몃 해가 되엿는지? 조금도 변하는 일이 업스니 그 간판에 맛을 드렷는지는 모르나, 엇잿던 이것은 엇던지오.
復  시대착오의 大禮服임은 인물 간판이야말로 우슴거리라고 하고 십슴니다. 가장 추한 것이 가장 눈에 띄난 것이니 이야 그림이던 무엇이던 간에 헤롭지 안타면 안켓지오. 이것 가지고서도 참말 지금것 화평하계 하야왓스니 문제는 업스리라.
碩  똑 「仁丹」 상표와 비슷하지 안어요? 간판을 보고 늑기여지는 것은 그 만큼만 돈을 모앗스면 더 모흘 필요가 업다는 듯이 보히는데, 엇지 생가하면 조흔 생각인지 모르나 조곰쯤은 우리 商界 전체의 체면도 생각하는 뎜이 좀 잇섯스면 하엿슴니다, 그러니 외관부터 좀 개량하엿스면 엇더할지요.
記者  食道園도 지나가는 길이니 한 마듸 하여 볼가요. 1등 金牌의 受領이라고 뒤떠드니 말이지.
復  이런 간판은 食道園 격에 그저 마즌 것이라고 암니다. 이국 정서를 자어내야 足袋親舊를 끄을게 되닛가. 그러나 한 거름 더 나서서 간판 뿐만 안이라 현관 장치도 갓치 하면 그 효과가 더 크지 안을가요. 언제던지 간판 제 몸 혼자 스지 못하난 것이외다. 건물이나 간판이나 서로 조혼 조화가 잇서야만 그때야 비로소 간판에 제가 뜻한 바 위력이 생길 것이라고 봄니다.
碩  도대체, 지금까지에 평한 간판보다 별취미를 끄는데 그 黃金萬能의 상징인 바닥에 도금한 간판, 그 싸리비로 쓴 것 갓흔 쌀쌀글 보히는 글자 엇젯던 그 怜悧하게＜118＞ 생각해내인 그 간판은 족히 써, 南村 양반들의 환심은 도맛게 된 듯, 돈 만히 버시우.
記者  큰 廣橋 모통이 옛날 五福商店 터(趾) 여러 번 간판이 변하엿는데 지금 福島商店은 꽤 오래하고도 좀 번창해가는 모양이니 그 주인이 용돈을 들 쓰거나 수단이 前사람보다 나은 모양이지. 앗차 군소리로군. 저 간판은 엇더함닛가.
碩  퍽, 예리한 腦髓를 가진 이의 수단으로 된 간판이올시다. 그것은 애초의 福島商店의 간판을 三色線을 건너지른 그 우해 「元價提供」이라고 쓴 간판을 가리워버린 것, 그 간판 자체의 색조라던지 선이라던지가 좃타는 것이 안이라 시세를 따라서는 본래 잇서야만 할 것을 가리워 버린 용단! 『씩-슨』 에 잇서서는 엇더한 방법을 해야, 고객을 끄을 수 잇다는 것을 생각하는 듯 십흔 것임니다.
記者  白商會는 엇덜가요.
復  내가 보든 중에 가장 낫분 편이라고 하고 십슴니다. 이런 형식의 간판은 두서넛 잇는 모양이니 압흐로 통트러 말하는 것이 좃치 안을가 함니다.
碩  기왕 말이 난 김에 해버립시다. 철망사로 얼거짠 간판, 夏節에만 소용될 간판이 이 추은 深冬에 우루루 떨고 잇스니 보는 사람이 더 춥슴니다, 紗衣를 두룬 미인의 肉色이 더 아름답다는 맛에 그 간판이 필요한지는 모르나 그 배경인 즉 오래 전에 백색 「뻔키」 칠한 양철 조각으로 가리운 몬지가 케케로 안즌.-맛치 독개비 捿息터 갓흔 그 뒤 맵시-모도가 으스스-하여서......엇이ㅅ추어 이런 망사 간판을 쓰려면 망사 뒤가 깻긋한 데라야 할 것임니다.
記者  金剛商會 간판이나 잠간 말하여 보기로 합시다.
復  이집은 여러 번 변한 듯한데 예나 지금이나 똑갓슴니다. 대관절 이러케 큰 집에 그 간판 가지고서 친할 맛이 생길가요.
碩  그러나 쓸 데 업시 번잡한 것은 그 결과가 醜밧게 업슴니다, 도리혀 그러케 단조로운 것이 나흘 것 갓지만＜119＞ 시기가 시기라, 간판의 효력이 클 것 갓흔데.
記者  앗다, 그 간판에 글씨 간격을 교묘하게 떼엿군. 「永昌皮」 하고 그 가운데로 「막크」를 집어넛코 「革商會」라 하엿스니 그 가운데 「막크」를 집어 던지고 「한」字를 집어너헛스면 「영창피한피혁상회」가 되겟지, 하하하, 그 간판은 엇뎟슴닛가.
復(碩) 「一時」에 우서버린다.
記者  여기는 좀 뚝 떠러저 오는 곳이 되여서 퍽 외로워 보히는 약방인데 銀松亭 엽헤 밧삭 대여섯는 天一藥房黃金町支店 간판은 엇더함닛가.
碩  큰 간판이라던지, 그 기동마다에 건 간판이 누가 보던지 乾材藥局으로 보힘니다, 종류는 食道園 간판과 비슷하나 좀 高品的인 것 갓슴니다.
復  잘 된 것임니다. 목각 주련도 간판의 역할을 하지 안습닛가. 딱한 것은 조곰 전에 張永樂商店으로부터 殖産公司에 일으기까지 엇저면 그리도 똑갓흔 것을 달아노앗는지 알 수 업는 일이요.
記者  光化門 턱으로부터 鍾路로 거러 나려갑시다. 웬일인지 그리 눈에 번적 띄이난 것이 업지 안슴닛가.
復(碩)글세 그런가 봄니다.
記者  永成洋靴店이 먼처 눈에 듬니다 그려.
復  사실임니다. 그림에 이상한 맛이 잇서 천하지도 안코 글얼 듯 하게 보이니 성공이겟지요.
碩  동감이외다.
記者  여기는 德元商店인데 지점이 두서넛 되고 東亞婦人商會까지 경영한다는 소문이 잇는데 이집 간판은 엇더함닛가.
碩  글세요. 생각하든 것과는 딴판이올시다. 본점이나 지점이나 보잘 것 업슴니다, 내용 충실을 목적하는지는 모르나, ...... 그런 상점에서 自體를 위하든지 市街美를 도옵기 위하여서 간판을 업새던지 거기에 주력하던지 해보앗스면 함니다.
復  無言.
記者  그러면 그집과 나란히 붓흔 漢英公司의 간판은 엇더함닛가.
復  그저 그만함니다 만은 이집 것이 德元商店 것보다는 낫슴니다. 하나 글자의 두테를 보일야고 따로이 선을 긋난대 이것을 위로 밧구엇스면 엇덜가 함니다. 간판 양 편에 세공한 기둥도 간판이 놉히 달닌 만치 그리 신긔치 못한 것이외다.
碩  沈黙.
記者  여긔 오니까 생각이 나는구면...... 和信商會는 엇덧습닛가.
碩  글세 이곳은 鍾路 네 거리에서도 누구나 얼는 눈에 띄는 터전에 처한 그 만큼 더구나 朝鮮, 시가지의 중앙인만큼 여러 가지 점으로 생각을 만히 가저야 할 줄 암니다.＜120＞ 그러나 아조 추물은 안인 줄 암니다.
復  황금색 바탕 큼직하니 그럴 듯 함니다. 자신이 잇서 보이고 이름 널니난 상점의 간판답습니다.
記者  鍾路警察署 엽 金興鎬販賣店하고 裁判所 모통이 大陸고무京城總販賣店하고 그 위치라던가 인연이 이상하게 되엿스니 엇지 한 말 하지 안을 수 잇슬가요.
復  글세요. 金興鎬販賣店은 잡다한 형식으로 특이하나 野蠻人裝身術과 優劣이 업슬 것이며 大陸고무京城總販賣店 것은 이와 갓흔 식으로서난 제일 낫다고 암니다. 엇재 그런고 하니 철망에나 목편 위에 글자에 글자를 언저논 것은 글자만이 똑똑히 눈에 뜨이난 동시에 갑갓게 보임이 이 형식의 장점일 것이외다. 이것에난 필요한 요건이 잇스니 별 것이 안이라 배경이 조코 그름에 잇는 것이외다. 숫제 배경이 잘 보이지 안토록 만드러 노은 이집이 가장 낫다는 것임니다.
碩  同感.
記者  漢昌商會, 李完植商店, 鐘聲商會, 는 대개 비슷한 간판인데 평하실가요.
碩  醜陋한 그림으로 제작한 간판보담은 평범함니다. 평범한 그 만큼 평할 兩端間의 특징이 업습니다.
復  布木店 저의끼리 毛物店은 제대로 고무신 장사도 共論들 하고 書店도 이와 맛찬가지로 간판들을 하여 노으니 아마도 무슨 규약이 잇슴이 안닐가요. 특종의 현상이올시다.
記者  自作製靴所라니 어늬 것은 他作이 잇습닛가.
復  일음이야 엇잿던 간에 전체로 잘 된 것이외다.
碩  탄아하고 도안적인 그 간판은 그곳에서는 精製를 의미하는 것 갓습니다. 女子靴專門인 만큼 그 간판도 산뜻하다고 할지 그러나 側面 간판은 거긔에 比類 못 되는군.
記者  그 다음으로는 朝鮮婦人技藝社! 그 간판이야말로 얌전한 시악시갓지 안어요?
碩  간판은 꼭 그림이 안이면 안 된다는 정칙이 어데＜121＞ 잇겟습닛가 마는 그림이 서양풍이여서 그럿치 技藝社라는 것은 표명된 것 갓고 글시도 그 그림과 調가 됨니다. 탄색으로 그만큼 눈에 띄는 듯 하는 것으로는 몃재 안 갈 것 갓습니다. 그러나 좀 허술해진 늣김이 업슬가.
復  썩 묘함니다. 상점 전부로 통일이 잘 되엿슴니다. 安君 말과 갓치 단색으로 그 만큼 쾌력이 잇는 것은 듬은 것이외다.
記者  京一洋靴店도 보고 가지요.
復  洋靴店으로 필요한 그림만 그려 노은 것이 이 상점으로서 온당한 일이겟지요. 그러나 모통이에 부친 것은 보기 실키 한이 업슴니다. 이런 탈선은 하필 이 상점뿐 안이라 이 상점에 잇서서난 더욱 눈에 띄임니다 그려.
碩  별다른 의견이 업소이다.
記者  이런 무어볼 것 잇나. 東亞풋뽈製造公司나 가지고 말하여 볼가요.
復  네-서울에 드문 그림임니다. 사람을 그린 것인지 사람과 근사한 동물을 그린 것인지 참아 사람으로서난 보기 흉한 간판이외다.
碩  지금까지 평한 간판은 美醜를 不係하고 평할 가치가 잇겟스나 이것갓치 간판 격에 떠러지는 것은 稀有하구먼요, 그것도 自己滋味지만 간판이란 결국 남의게 보히자는 것인데 좀 개량하엿스면 조흘 줄 알며 그러면 물건도 더 팔릴 것 갓슴니다.
記者  그 다음 先施百貨商店을 봅시다.
復  필요 업서 보이난 그림으로 필요 잇시 만드난 것도 좃켓지요. 중말 곡선적으로 휘휘 돌아서 드난 것도 상점 간판으로서 한 수단임니다. 이 뜻으로 과히 낫분 것이라고 보고 십지 안슴니다.
碩  길 가는 사람의 疲勞와 困憊를 慰撫하는 편으로 그런 간판도 간혹 有功한 때도 잇겟스나, 그것을 보고서 상품을 살야는 마음의 충동을 줄가? 그러나, 추하다고 말하지 못한다 하면 佳品이라고 말하지 못하는 정도 이내에서, 나무랠 수 업지요.
記者  朴德裕洋靴店은 자기의 말을 드르면 양화계의 元祖라는데 그 집 간판은 엇더타고 하실가요.＜122＞
碩  그럿타 하면 그만한 年度로서 또는 元祖인 그만큼 그러케 큰 그림 간판이 엄서도 좃켓지요. 중간 간판에 비하여서는 옥상 간판이 추함니다. 글시나, 테두리 빗치나, 도리혀 건물의 외모를 抵傷하는 편임니다, 佳品은 못 되나 중간 간판으로도 족하지 안슴닛가.
復  나는 보아도 몰으겟다고나 할까요.
記者  琴喜樂器商店은.
復  앗가도 말하엿지만 장식의 의미로도 간판을 다는 것이외다. 그러니 이 집에 잇서서난 간판 書體를 개화식혀야지요. 집과 갓치...... .
碩  同感.
記者  朝日洋服店은 바로 日本風이 뚝뚝 듬니다 그려.
復  그야 일홈부터 그런 맛이 잇스니...... ...
碩  洋服店 간판 처놋코 하나 보잘 것 업섯슴니다. 그래도 이것이 간결한 편이라면 편이겟지...... .
記者  그럼 相泰洋服店을 또 하나 봅시다 그려.
復  밤낫 보아야 제 타령이지 별 수가 잇슴닛가. 서양 사람의 다리나 기다란 것을 그리지 안는다면 이 집 갓흔 사람안인 것에 보히난 것 갓흔 것을 그러노흐니...... 그저 고만둡시다.
碩  贊成.
記者  그럼 이것으로 고만 두지요마는 보시던 중에 엇던 것이 제일 나며 엇던 것이 가장 보기 실혓슴닛가.
復  내 생각 갓해서난 제일 잘 된 편으로 鐘路에 잇난 朝鮮製藥社나 典洞에 잇난 朝鮮婦人技藝社일 듯 하여.
碩  나 亦 朝鮮婦人技藝社와 鐘路通梨花洋靴店 등이올시다.
記者  그럼 그 다음으로 가장 눈에 스트른 것은요.
復  하도 만으니 골느기 어려우나 白商會, 裕昌商會, 東亞製造公司, 京一鞋店 등이라 할가요.
碩  무엇을 표준하야 말할 수 업스나 형의 것에 동감이오.＜123＞
＜114-123＞