별건곤 제3호
1927년 01월 01일
한층더 宏壯할 二月號 (A More Magnificent February Issue)
사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-editing Notes)

A More Magnificent February Issue
Continuation of the Modern Rare Occupation Exhibition

We believe that the Rare Occupation Exhibition, which has been very popular and highly praised, is not only a source of interesting articles and the world's rare items but also more than just a simple interest. We will exhibit even more rare and unique occupations that were not featured this time in the February issue. A great rarity exceeding the January issue!

The Great Monster "Silver Fly" Mobilizes

The great monster and great detective "Silver Fly (銀파리)," who has startled the world with scathing satire and secret surveillance throughout the pioneering "New Woman" era! Unable to ignore the readers' ardent requests, this magazine strongly urged his mobilization. The mobilization of Silver Fly! The mobilization of Silver Fly! February issue! February issue!

Second Grand Investigation by the Disguised Reporter

Will the second disguised reporter be a man or a woman...? That will remain an absolute secret until the day of the announcement, but with the experience of the first time, the second investigation will be even more scathing and intense, sure to surprise the world. We confidently predict it.

Grand Gathering of Famous Men and Women in Kyŏngsŏng??

Kyŏngsŏng has many famous things, and there are many famous men and women among its people! Famous for being tall, famous for being short, famous for being witty, famous for being clumsy, famous for being quiet, famous for being dirty, famous for not being able to marry, famous for not being able to get married, famous for marrying well, famous for failing in love – there are countless famous men and women whose names are known to everyone, and they will all gather in the February issue. This is truly an unprecedented grand spectacle.

North and South Teams of Reporters in a Great Exploration Competition - Voting by General Readers

It may sound boastful, but "Pyŏlgŏn'gon" has several famous reporters. These reporters will be divided into amusing North and South teams, and they will either climb mountains in the snow or dark night or venture into secret caves, writing competitive exploration articles. Readers will read these articles and vote on which team did the better exploration. A great start to the New Year? Who are the reporters? Where will the North team go? Wait for the February issue.

Display Window Decoration Contest for Each Store

The signboard contest in this issue will certainly provide much reference to our merchants. In the next February issue, we will evaluate the style of display window decorations. It will be held between January 5th and 10th... Please look forward to it.

The quickest way to read a book is to pre-order it. <131>

Named Entities

京城	Kyŏngsŏng
別乾坤	Pyŏlgŏn'gon



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제3호
발행일	1927년 01월 01일
기사제목	한층더 宏壯할 二月號
기사형태	사고·편집후기

한층더 宏壯할 二月號
現代珍職業展覽會續開
大人氣大好評의 珍職業展覽會는 興味記事로 天下珍品인 同時에 單純한 興味에그치는 것이아니라고 우리는 밋는다. 이번에 出品안된 것으로 더욱 珍奇한 職業을 二月號에 모조리 出品한다. 一月號以上의 大珍品!
大怪物『銀파리』出動
開闢時代『新女性』時代를 通하야 辛酸한 諷刺ㆍ秘密한 尾行으로 世目을놀래든 大怪物ㆍ大探偵『銀파리』!빗발치듯하는 讀者의 懇勸을 못닉이여 本誌는 그의 出動을 强請하엿다. 銀파리의 出動! 銀파리의 出動! 二月號! 二月號!
變裝記者第二回大探査
二回變裝記者는 男子일가 女子일가……그것은 發表日지 絶代秘密이거니와 一回의 經驗이잇서 二回는 더욱 辛酸하고 猛烈한 活動으로 世上을 놀낼것만은 壯談하고 豫吉둔다.
京城名物男女大集合??
名物만흔 京城에는 人物에도 名物男女가만타! 키가커서 名物ㆍ작어서 名物ㆍ찍스러 名物ㆍ엉하야 名物ㆍ얌전해서 名物ㆍ지저분해 名物ㆍ장가못가 名物ㆍ시집못가 名物ㆍ結婚잘해 名物ㆍ失戀잘해 名物ㆍ얼마던지잇는 名物이 姓名만 말하면누구나알 名物男女가 二月號에 總集合을한다 이 實로 空前의 大壯觀
南北 兩隊記者探險大競爭 投票는 一般讀者
자랑갓흐나 『別乾坤』에는 名物記者가몃사람잇다. 이 記者를 우스운 南北兩隊로 分하야 雪中 或, 暗夜에 登山이나 或은 秘密窟에 出動하야 各各競爭的으로 探險記事를 쓰고 讀者는 그 記事를 닑고 어느 便이 探險을 잘하얏나 審判投票를 하는 것이다. 新春劈頭의 大快擧? 記者는누구누구 南隊는 어데 北隊는 어데로? 二月號를 기다리라.
各商店陳列窓裝飾品評會
이번號의 看板品評會는 確實히우리 商業家諸氏에게 만흔 參考를 이바지할줄밋는바 다음 二月號에는 陳列窓裝飾맵시를 評하기로 하엿다 一月五日로 十日지의 사이에 하기로.………期待하라.
冊을 第一速히보는 方法은 注文올미리해두는것＜131＞
＜131＞